                                                                                                                    PDF Download
                                                                                                                    3770581.pdf
                                                                                                                    03 April 2026
                                                                                                                    Total Citations: 2
                                                                                                                    Total Downloads: 354
    .
    .
        Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3770581




                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                          Published: 03 October 2025
        .
                                                                                                          Accepted: 28 September 2025
        .
    RESEARCH-ARTICLE                                                                                      Revised: 25 June 2025
    Integrating Various Soware Artifacts for Beer LLM-based Bug                                         Received: 05 December 2024




                                                                                                          .
    Localization and Program Repair




                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                          Citation in BibTeX format




                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                          .
    QIONG FENG, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    XIAOTIAN MA, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    JIAYI SHENG, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    ZIYUAN FENG, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    WEI SONG, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    PENG LIANG, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
    .
    .
    .
    Open Access Support provided by:
    .
    Nanjing University of Science and Technology
    .
    Wuhan University
    .
                                                                                      ACM Transactions on Soware Engineering and Methodology
                                                                                                                 hps://doi.org/10.1145/3770581
                                                                                                                               EISSN: 1557-7392
.
Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug
Localization and Program Repair
QIONG FENG, Nanjing University of Science and Technology; State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China
XIAOTIAN MA, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
JIAYI SHENG, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
ZIYUAN FENG, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
WEI SONG, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
PENG LIANG∗ , School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
LLMs have garnered considerable attention for their potential to streamline Automated Program Repair (APR). LLM-based
approaches can either insert the correct code using an infilling-style technique or directly generate patches when provided
with buggy methods, aiming for plausible patches to pass all tests. However, most of LLM-based APR methods rely on a
single type of software information, such as issue descriptions or error stack traces, without fully leveraging a combination of
diverse software artifacts. Human developers, in contrast, often use a range of information — such as debugging data, issue
discussions, and error stack traces — to diagnose and fix bugs. Despite this, many LLM-based approaches do not explore
which specific types of software information best assist in localizing and repairing software bugs. Addressing this gap is
crucial for advancing LLM-based APR techniques.
     To investigate this and mimic the way human developers fix bugs, we propose DEVLoRe (short for DEVeloper Localization
and Repair). In this framework, LLMs first use issue content (description and discussion) and stack error traces to localize
buggy methods, then rely on debug information in buggy methods and issue content and stack error to localize buggy lines
and generate valid patches. We evaluated the effectiveness of issue content, error stack traces, and debugging information
in bug localization and automatic program repair. Our results show that while issue content and error stack is particularly
effective in assisting LLMs with fault localization and program repair respectively, different types of software artifacts
complement each other in addressing various bugs. By incorporating these three types of artifacts and using the Defects4J v2.0
dataset for evaluation, DEVLoRe successfully localizes 49.3% of single-method bugs and generates 56.0% plausible patches.
Additionally, DEVLoRe can localize 47.6% of non-single-method bugs and generates 14.5% plausible patches. Moreover, our
framework streamlines the end-to-end process from buggy source code to a complete repair, and achieves a 39.7% and 17.1%
of single-method and non-single-method bug repair rate, outperforming current state-of-the-art APR methods. Furthermore,
we re-implemented and evaluated our framework, demonstrating its effectiveness in resolving 9 unique issues compared to
other state-of-the-art frameworks using the same or more advanced models on SWE-bench Lite. We also discussed whether a
∗ Corresponding author


Authors’ Contact Information: Qiong Feng, Nanjing University of Science and Technology; State Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, qiongfeng@njust.edu.cn; Xiaotian Ma, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China,
xyzboom@njust.edu.cn; Jiayi Sheng, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, shengjiayi@njust.edu.cn; Ziyuan Feng,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, azumaseren@njust.edu.cn; Wei Song, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, Nanjing, China, wsong@njust.edu.cn; Peng Liang, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, liangp@whu.
edu.cn.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM 1557-7392/2025/10-ART
https://doi.org/10.1145/3770581


                                                                                                            ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
2   •    Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


leading framework for Python code can be directly applied to Java code, or vice versa. The source code and experimental
results of this work for replication are available at https://github.com/XYZboom/DEVLoRe.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software maintenance tools; Software verification and validation.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Large Language Model, Automatic Program Repair, Fault Localization

1       INTRODUCTION
    Automatic Program Repair (APR) streamlines the process of identifying and correcting code defects, signif-
icantly reducing the time and effort required for manual bug fixing [22]. Traditional APR techniques employ
various methods, including template-based approaches [11, 19, 21, 26, 28, 30] and neural machine translation
(NMT) [9, 14, 25, 52], to generate potential patches that are both syntactically valid and semantically meaningful.
Although these methods can produce correct patches for certain bugs, they also have notable limitations. NMT
models rely heavily on bug-fixing training data, making them unable to generate patches for new or unseen
types of bugs. On the other hand, template-based approaches suffer from a limited set of templates and struggle
to address more complex, nontrivial bug fixes [43].
    Recent studies have explored the use of LLMs for APR, either by having LLMs fill in the correct code in
buggy methods using an infilling-style technique or by directly generating patches when provided with buggy
methods [13, 24, 36, 39–44, 50]. The initial results demonstrate the ability of LLMs to correctly repair real-world
bugs, including those that were previously unrepairable by existing APR approaches. One of the best-performing
frameworks is Agentless [40], which feeds an LLM with only issue description and can automatically solve
GitHub issues. These promising outcomes highlight the potential of LLMs to develop more effective APR methods.
    However, there are still two major limitations that need to be addressed:
      • Current LLM-based approaches do not fully incorporate various types of software artifacts. Most LLMs
         rely on just one or two kinds of software artifacts, such as issue descriptions or code structure, while
         other important artifacts are underutilized. For instance, debugging information, which is a critical tool
         for human developers in diagnosing and resolving bugs, is often not fully leveraged.
      • While various LLM-based approaches make use of different software artifacts, such as issue descriptions
         and error stack traces, it remains unclear which specific type of information most effectively aids LLMs in
         localizing and automatically repairing software bugs.
    To address these two limitations and further explore the ability of LLMs to localize and fix software bugs
(bug, defect, and fault are used interchangeably in this paper), we propose feeding LLMs different types of
software artifacts to determine which information best leverages their capabilities in bug localizing and fixing.
The rationale behind this approach is that human developers typically do not rely on a single type of information
when localizing and fixing software bugs. Instead, they combine various sources of information in software
development, such as issue descriptions, proof of concept (PoC), stack traces, discussions in issues, and more.
Based on developers’ experience, having more information helps to better understand the root cause of bugs,
ultimately leading to more effective bug localization and fixes.
    To achieve this, we propose the DEVLoRe framework, which asks LLMs to mimic human developers for bug
localization and program repair. Along with this framework, we design two tools to extract executed methods in
failed test cases and debugging information of buggy methods. In this framework, we feed the chosen LLM with
three types of software artifacts: issue content (including issue description and discussion), error stack trace, and
debug information. Then, using the well-known Defects4J dataset [17], we evaluate how these different types of
software artifacts contribute to effectively localizing and fixing bugs. Our experiment results demonstrate that
issue content is the most effective indicator for buggy method’s localization, achieving 43.6% for localizing single-
method bugs and 40.6% for localizing non-single-method bugs. Stack error trace proves to be the best indicator
for single-method bug fixing, with a precision of 27.0%. Additionally, our findings highlight that different types of

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                            Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair   •   3


software information can complement each other in the process of localizing and fixing bugs. By combining issue
content and error stack trace, we achieve a state-of-the-art performance of 49.3% in localizing the single-method
bugs. Furthermore, incorporating issue content, error stack trace, and debugging information results in a fix rate
of 43.1% for single-method bugs.
     As our DEVLoRe framework does not specify that the localization and fix of buggy methods should be singular,
it can localize and fix bugs across multiple methods (non-single-method bugs). For example, by combining all three
software artifacts, DEVLoRe can fix 9.4% of non-single-method bugs with provided buggy locations. Moreover,
similar to Agentless [40], DEVLoRe relies on LLMs throughout the entire end-to-end process of fault localization
and program repair. It can successfully fix 28.0% of single-method bugs and 11.2% of non-single-method bugs when
combining all three artifacts. To the best of our knowledge, our approach outperforms current state-of-the-art
methods.
     To summarize, our contributions in this paper are as follows:
      (1) To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to compare different software artifacts in assisting
          LLMs’ ability to perform both fault localization and program repair. The results can help developers
          understand LLMs’ potential when provided with a variety of software artifacts.
      (2) We propose a simple and lightweight framework that leverages LLMs to conduct an end-to-end process
          for bug localization and program repair. Accompanying this framework we design a strict input/output
          prompt. The DEVLoRe framework demonstrates a strong ability to localize and fix more software bugs in
          less time and at a lower cost, compared to current state-of-the-art methods on the Defects4J dataset.
      (3) We evaluated our framework on SWE-bench Lite and demonstrated DEVLoRe’s effectiveness in resolving
          9 unique issues compared to other state-of-the-art frameworks using the same or more advanced models.
          We further discussed whether a leading framework for Python code can be directly applied to Java code,
          or vice versa.
   The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the motivation of using various software artifacts,
Section 3 outlines the proposed approach, Section 4 introduces the experiment setup and the research questions,
Sections 5 and 6 present and discuss the results respectively, Section 7 reviews the related work, and Section 8
concludes this work with future directions.

2     THREE MOTIVATING EXAMPLES
    Our assumption is that LLM-based program repair tools have the potential to be much more effective if they
can leverage a variety of software artifacts, such as code snippets, version history, documentation, and even
testing outputs. By providing LLMs with a rich set of contextual data, they can understand and localize bugs
more accurately and offer more precise fixes. This assumption is based on a human software engineer’s daily
practice. When a human developer tries to fix a bug, they would examine various resources such as the issue
descriptions, error stack, debugging information, and test cases, until a solution is identified. However, currently
most LLM-based repair approaches underutilize or use limited software artifacts. Here, we provide three examples
to demonstrate the motivation of this work and the ability of LLMs to localize and fix bugs when given access to
different types of software artifacts.

2.1     Debugging Information to the Rescue
    The Lang 1b bug involves the createNumber method, which takes a string as its parameter and returns a
number represented by that string. While studying the Lang 1b bug, we noticed that the newly added failing
test case is the input “0x80000000” for the createNumber method. When this test case is provided, the buggy
createNumber method incorrectly treats the input string as an integer, when it should be a long integer instead.
The code snippet in Figure 1 shows a portion of the buggy createNumber method in Lang 1b. The local variable

                                                                                               ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
4   •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


hexDigits represents the valid hexadecimal digits. As human software developers, we can quickly recognize that
at Line 471, the condition should be “hexDigits > 8 || (hexDigits == 8 && firstSigDigit > ‘7’)” (firstSigDigit refers to
the first valid hexadecimal digit).




                                                 Fig. 1. Code snippet for Lang 1b

    For this bug, we provided the LLM with Lang 1b’s issue content (https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LANG-
747) and the stack error message shown in Figure 2, but both could not help the LLM generate a plausible fix
or near-to-correct patch. This is because the leap required in reasoning is significant, and the buggy method
is quite long. Neither of the information provided above could pinpoint the buggy line precisely, let alone


                                                                                       debugging
                                          issue content                               information
                                     without proof of concept
                                                                            ClassName: lang3.math.NumberUtils
                                                                           MethodNameAndLine:createNumber:468




                                                                                           error stack
                                                                                        without code info




                                   Fig. 2. Issue content, error stack and debug info of Lang 1b


ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                           Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair   •   5


                                                                                    clueless debugging
                                                                                        information
                                                                                    ClassName: commons.lang.StringUtils
                                                                                MethodNameAndLine:containsIgnoreCase:1045
                             A developer's comment states the program's
                                             expectation




                                                                               clueless error stack




                             Fig. 3. Issue content, error stack and debug info for Lang 40b



generate a plausible fix. To address this, we introduced debugging information to help the LLM understand
the necessary changes. One piece of debug information we provided was a series of variable-value pairs, com-
mons.lang3.math.NumberUtils:createNumber:468 {hexDigits:8}. This indicates that the code is about to execute Line
468 and that the value of hexDigits is 8 for the given test case. This enables the LLM to understand why the code
on Line 474 was executed instead of Line 471. In one of the responses, the LLM suggested changing Line 468 to if
(hexDigits > 16 || (hexDigits == 8 && str.charAt(2) >= ‘8’)) , which, although not completely accurate, demonstrates
that the provided debug information has a positive impact on fixing the bug.

2.2   Issue Content to the Rescue
    Sometimes, the discussions and Proof of Concept (PoC) included in the issue content can help the LLM better
understand the expectations for bug repair. Figure 3 shows a developer’s comment in the issue content, which
states the expected behavior of the program (https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LANG-432). The original code
attempted to convert both input strings to uppercase using String.toUpperCase() and then return the result of
invoking the contains method. However, String.toUpperCase() is locale-sensitive, which makes it unsuitable
for case-insensitive comparisons. For example, the character 0x00DF represents “ß” in Unicode. If we apply
String.toUpperCase() to this character, it becomes “SS” in the Turkey locale. Consequently, comparing “ss”
with “ß” would result in an equal match. Therefore, in this case, we should not use String.toUpperCase() but
instead compare the characters individually.
    The debug information, org.apache.commons.lang.StringUtils:containsIgnoreCase:1045 {“str”:“ß”, “searchStr”:“SS”},
and the error stack trace shown in Figure 3 merely re-display the test cases and do not clearly highlight the
relationship between the character 0x00DF and ‘SS’. As a result, neither the error stack trace nor the debug
information provides any useful clues about the bug, and LLMs cannot generate a plausible fix when provided
with either the stack message or the debug information alone. However, with the description and expected
behavior outlined in the issue content, GPT-4o is able to generate a correct patch.

2.3   Error Stack to the Rescue
   When a bug triggers an exception, as opposed to merely being an unexpected behavior, the error stack trace
generated at the point where the exception occurs can be helpful in diagnosing and fixing the error. Stack trace

                                                                                                 ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
6   •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


                                                                                 noisy debug information in loop

                                                 issue content with
                                                   unclear labels




                                                                                                error stack




                                  Fig. 4. Issue content, error stack and debug info for Lang 39b




                                     Fig. 5. A patch generated by GPT-4o-mini for Lang 39b


provides a detailed record of the sequence of method calls that led to an exception, making it easier to pinpoint
the exact location in the code where the bug arises.
    For example, in Lang 39b shown in Figure 4, the developer forgot to check for null values in the elements of
the input parameters replacementList and searchList, which can lead to a NullPointerException (NPE). However, if
we do not inform the LLM about the occurrence of an NPE in the error stack, the LLM will not be able to identify
where null detection is necessary. The stack trace clearly indicates that the NPE occurs on Line 3676 in the class
StringUtils. By providing this stack information to the LLM, it is able to generate a repair, as shown in Figure 5.

2.4     Observations From the Above Three Examples
   From these three examples, we can see that issue content, error stack traces, and debugging information can
complement each other in bug detection and fixing. Each type of artifact provides a different level of context, and
when combined, they create a more comprehensive understanding of the bug. Issue content offers the high-level

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                           Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair   •   7


description and expectations for the fix, error stack traces pinpoint the exact location of the failure, and debugging
information provides granular details about the variable states and flow of execution. By incorporating these
diverse artifacts, the LLM’s repair process becomes more holistic.

3     APPROACH
    As shown in Figure 6, our approach utilizes LLMs in two distinct steps: bug localization and program repair.
Along with these two steps, we developed two dynamic tools — MethodRecorder and DebugRecorder — to assist
LLMs in handling bug localization and fix. MethodRecorder tracks the methods executed during the failing
test case(s), while DebugRecorder is designed to extract debug information from the buggy method(s). Debug
information is stored in a list, where each entry includes the method name, line number, variable names, and the
JSON-formatted content of these variables. Table 1 shows the prompts used in our process. The first, second, and
third rows correspond to the prompts used for the tasks of localizing buggy methods, localizing buggy lines, and
generating patches, respectively. The first two rows of prompts are used for the bug localization task and the
last row of prompt is used for the program repair task. For each task, we provide the LLM with <General Task
Prompt> + <Input Prompt> + <Expected Output Prompt> to receive the response from the LLM.




                             Fig. 6. Our approach for bug localization and program repair



3.1    Localize Buggy Method(s)
    We emulate the behavior of human developers, who use errors in stack traces and proof of concept (PoC)
from issue content to localize buggy methods. To this end, we apply MethodRecorder to trace the methods
invoked during the execution of failing test cases. We then collect the signatures of these invoked methods and
prompt the LLM to identify the buggy method(s). In this step, we also provide the LLM with any available error
stack traces and issue content, including general description of the issue and developers’ discussion/comment
under this issue. We choose not to use debugging information because it is typically gathered at runtime and
involves instrumentation (see java.lang.instrument.Instrumentation [3]), which can be computationally expensive.
In developers’ daily practice, they set just a few of breakpoints and collect important information about variables.

                                                                                              ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
8    •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


                    Table 1. Prompts used in localizing buggy methods, buggy lines and generating patches

    General Task Prompt                 Input Prompt                Expected Output Prompt
    You are a Software Engineer.
    Review the following skele-
    ton of classes, test case(s), and                               Please localize class name and method names or
                                        ### Skeleton of
    exception that occurs when                                      field names that need to be edited.
                                        Classes ###
    doing the test.                                                 Examples:
                                        {related_methods}
    Provide a set of locations that                                 path.to.ClassA::methodA
                                        {error_stack}
    need to be edited to fix the                                    path.to.ClassA::methodB
                                        {issue_content}
    bug. The locations must be                                      path.to.ClassB::methodA
    specified as method names
    or field names.
    You are a Software Engineer.
    Review the following skele-                                     Please localize class name and line number that need
    ton of classes, test case(s), and   ### Skeleton          of    to be edited.
    exception that occurs when          Classes ###                 Examples:
    doing the test.                     {buggy_methods}             path.to.ClassA
    Provide a set of locations that     {error_stack}                line: 20
    need to be edited to fix the        {issue_content}              line: 45
    bug. The locations must be          {debugging_info}             line: 46
    specified as line number in                                      line: 47
    class.
                                        ### Skeleton of             Please generate *SEARCH/REPLACE* edits to fix the
                                        Classes ###                 bug based on the info given above. Every *SEARCH/RE-
    You are a Software Engineer.        {buggy_methods} ###         PLACE* edit must use this format:
    Review the following meth-          Possible bug loca-           1. The file path
    ods and(or) fields of classes,      tions (for your refer-       2. The start of search block: «««< SEARCH
    test case(s), and exception         ence only) ###               3. A contiguous chunk of lines to search in the existing
    that occurs when doing the          {buggy_lines}               source code
    test. Try to fix the bug.           {error_stack}                4. The dividing line: =======
                                        {issue_content}              5. The lines to replace into the source code
                                        {debugging_info}             6. The end of the replace block: »»»> REPLACE


But setting breakpoints automatically is not practical. Therefore, before localizing buggy method(s), minimizing
instrumentation and debugging information is more efficient.

3.2      Localize Buggy Line(s)
    Once the buggy method(s) have been localized in the previous step, we utilize DebugRecorder to capture
detailed information about variable names and their values within the identified buggy method(s). The rationale
for introducing debugging information at this stage is that it provides a more granular view, which is particularly
beneficial for pinpointing the specific lines responsible for the bug and for understanding the internal state of
variables. The debugging information with variables’ value is often unnecessary during the initial localization
step, but becomes crucial when the focus shifts to identifying precise faults within a known problematic method.
    In this process, we gather debugging information as a list of variable-value pairs that reflect the state at
specific lines of code within the buggy method(s). This allows the LLM to understand the conditions and data flows

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                            Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair   •   9


that may contribute to the bug. Combined with the issue content, such as descriptions and discussions, along
with stack traces, this debugging information is fed into the LLM along with the body of the buggy method(s).
Together, these resources assist the LLM in localizing the exact line(s) within the method(s) where the bug
manifests, providing the context needed to understand and resolve the bug effectively.

3.3   Patch Generation
    For patch generation, we provide all relevant information to maximize the LLM’s ability to produce an
accurate repair. This includes the localized buggy buggy line(s) and method(s) identified in previous steps, as
well as the complete body of the buggy method(s). Additionally, we provide supplementary materials such as the
issue content, which may contain descriptions and discussions about the bug, the stack trace from the error, and
detailed debugging information captured at runtime. By supplying this comprehensive context, we enable the
LLM to better understand the specific code behavior that led to the error and to use this knowledge to generate
a more targeted and effective patch for the bug. For each bug, we use the LLM to generate multiple potential
patches in .diff format, which can be directly applied to the buggy code.

3.4   Patch Validation
    We apply the patches generated in the previous step to the buggy code and test them to evaluate their
effectiveness. If the patch passes the initial failed tests, we proceed it to pass all tests in case that it incur any
regression. If it passed all the tests, then it is considered a plausible fix. To facilitate this process, we utilize the
Defects4J framework to run the tests and verify the patches.
    To be consistent with existing studies [24, 53], if the patch is semantically equivalent to the original patch
provided by developers, it is considered a correct patch. As part of this validation process, the patch undergoes
manual inspection and cross-checking by two experienced developers to ensure its correctness. This step is
crucial to verify that the patch not only passes all automated tests but also aligns with the intended behavior
from a developer’s perspective. The manual inspection by developers serves as a final quality control step to
ensure that the patch addresses the bug correctly and does not introduce new bugs.

4 EXPERIMENT SETUP
4.1 Dataset
    We used the well-established Defects4J benchmark [17] for our experiments, specifically leveraging both
version 1.2 and version 2.0. Defects4J v1.2 contains 391 bugs from six real-world projects (note that there are
395 bugs in v1.2, but due to the update to Java 8, four bugs can no longer be reproduced), while v2.0 includes an
additional 444 bugs from 11 real-world projects. We chose Defects4J benchmark for two main reasons. First, it
offers a diverse set of software artifacts — such as issue URLs, error stacks, and test cases — that are well-suited
for our proposed ARP framework and help maximize its capabilities. Second, Defects4J benchmark has been
widely used in prior research, which facilitates a fair and meaningful comparison of our approach.

4.2   Parameters in Experiments and Baseline Selection
4.2.1 Parameters in Experiments: Due to the extremely long debugging information for some bugs recorded by
DebugRecorder, along with issue content and error stack, which exceeds the token limit of most LLMs, we opted
for the GPT-4 series model, known for its ability to handle long token sequences with a 128k token context window.
To manage costs, we selected the cost-effective GPT-4o-mini model, also with a 128k token context window, and
used the default settings (Temperature=0.5, Top-p=1). For the experimental setup, before automating the entire
process, we manually used a client with access to multiple LLMs and provided artifact information for 10 random
selected Defects4J bugs to evaluate the feasibility of our approach and to select appropriate models—considering

                                                                                               ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
10    •    Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


factors such as low cost, a large token context window, and minimal hallucination rate. During this step, we found
that the GPT-3.5 series exhibited a high rate of hallucination when generating patches, and we excluded it from
consideration. We also determined the appropriate format for the artifacts to be fed into the LLM. For example,
we pruned the debug information such as only recording variables that have changed, cropping long arrays and
lists to minimize token size. Additionally, we instructed the LLM to generate *SEARCH/REPLACE* edits when
producing patches, in order to reduce hallucination rate, as adopted by SOTA approaches [27, 32, 40, 51]. After
selecting the model, prompts and artifacts format, we used this preliminary process to determine the optimal
number of LLM calls at each step: localizing buggy methods, localizing buggy lines, and generating patches.
The rationale is that increasing the number of LLM calls beyond a certain point does not lead to significant
performance gains. Based on these manual experiments, we finalized the settings of the parameters. For buggy
method localization, we call the LLM only once. For buggy line localization, we call the LLM 10 times, collecting
10 responses, each identifying potential buggy lines. We then filter out duplicate responses (i.e., identical buggy
line locations). Finally, for each unique response, we ask the LLM to generate patches three times, ensuring that
multiple potential fixes are considered.

4.2.2 Baseline Selections: We selected state-of-the-art LLM-based fault localization and program repair frame-
works on the Defects4J dataset as our baselines for two reasons. First, using the same Defects4J dataset allows
us to directly compare our results with those reported in the baseline papers. Second, we focus on LLM-based
approaches to better evaluate our framework, which is also LLM-based and leveraging a set of software artifacts.

4.3       Research Questions
    In this work, we aim to answer the following research questions (RQs) for evaluating the effectiveness of
various software artifacts in assisting the chosen LLM in bug localization and APR task.
          • RQ1. Which software artifacts can better assist LLMs in localizing buggy methods and buggy
            lines when provided with source code? This RQ aims to identify the specific types of software artifacts -
            issue content, debugging information and error stack trace - that enhance the ability of LLMs to accurately
            pinpoint methods and code that contain bugs.
          • RQ2. Which software artifacts can better assist LLMs in generating plausible patches when
            provided with buggy methods? By answering this RQ, we can identify the specific types of software
            artifacts in assisting LLMs to produce plausible patches which can pass all unit tests.
          • RQ3. What is the overall performance of DEVLoRe in bug localization and program repair?
            Unlike some LLM-based approaches that focus on either fault localization or program repair while relying
            on traditional methods such as spectrum-based approaches [5] for fault localization [24, 41], DEVLoRe
            supports an end-to-end bug identification and program repair workflow. This RQ aims to evaluate the
            overall performance of DEVLoRe from the initial input of a code repository to the final output of a
            complete repair.

5 RESULTS
5.1 RQ1. Buggy Method and Buggy Lines Localization from Code Repository
5.1.1 Localizing Buggy Method(s). We first use our MethodRecorder tool, which runs the failing tests and records
the signatures of the methods that have been executed to narrow down the scope of buggy methods. Then we
provide the LLM with the signatures of the executed methods, along with issue content (including the issue
description and discussion, which we crawled from each bug’s issue URL) and the error stack trace corresponding
to the failing test case, as supplied by the Defects4J framework. In this step, we choose not to generate the
debugging information. The main reason is that the debugging information can be too long for LLMs to process

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                          Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair                     •   11


effectively before the buggy method(s) have been localized. Using the prompt specified in Table 1, we ask the
LLM to output the signatures of buggy method(s). To evaluate what kinds of software artifacts can better assist
the LLM in localizing buggy methods, we conduct four separate experiments by feeding the LLM with (1) only
executed method signatures, (2) executed method signatures and issue content, (3) executed method signatures
and error stack trace, and (4) executed method signatures, issue content and error stack trace.

                                                                            Issue                                           Stack

                                                                                         19                      37
                                                                                                      6
                                                                                    4                                  43
Table 2. Effectiveness of buggy method localization in De-
                                                                                             2               81
fects4J v2.0 with different software artifacts
                                                                              14                                            24
                                                                                                     144
                    Single Method Non-Single                                            17                        60
                                                                                                 9          18
         —          135/486=27.8% 77/320=24.1%                             ----                       4                       Issue+Stack
       Issue        207/475=43.6% 127/313=40.6%
       Stack        216/486=44.4% 123/320=38.4%                                                                                         ----
                                                                                                                                        Issue
   Issue + Stack    234/475=49.3% 149/313=47.6%                                                                                         Stack
                                                                                                                                        Issue+Stack

                                                                    Fig. 7. Overlap of buggy method localization in De-
                                                                    fects4J v2.0

    Table 2 shows the effectiveness of buggy method localization in these four experiments. The first row, labeled
“—”, indicates that only the related (executed) methods are fed to the LLM for buggy method localization. The
second, third and fourth rows represent scenarios when, in addition to related method localization, issue content,
error stack, or both are provided. Following the approach described in LLMAO [46], we consider a buggy method
correctly localized if at least one match in the LLM’s response corresponds to the buggy method (single-method
bugs) or one of the buggy methods (non-single-method bugs) in the ground truth. It is worth mentioning that
there exist bug cases where certain software artifacts can not be extracted, and in this case we calculate the ratio
by dividing only the number of bug cases with certain software artifacts information. Table 2 shows that, when
issue content or error stack is provided, the LLM is able to localize more buggy methods than nothing is provided.
When issue content is provided, 15.8% more single buggy methods and 16.5% more non-single buggy methods are
correctly localized. When error stack is included, 16.6% more single buggy methods and 14.3% more non-single
buggy methods are correctly localized. Furthermore, combining issue content and error stack achieves the best
performance, which results in 49.3% in localizing single buggy methods and 47.6% of non-single buggy methods.
    Figure 7 shows the overlap of results of buggy method localization with different artifacts in Defects4J v2.0.
We can see that when provided with issue content, the LLM can localize 19 extra bugs correctly. Similarly, when
provided with error stack, the LLM can localize 37 extra bugs correctly. This finding verifies our assumption in
Section 2 that different kinds of software artifacts can complement each other in buggy method localization.
    As existing SOTA fault localization approaches use Defects4J v1.2 dataset and adopt Top-n (the buggy method
is in the top 𝑛 list of the LLM’s response) to evaluate the performance of fault localization, we compare the
performance of DEVLoRe with the SOTA approaches in the same dataset and adopt Top-n approach. Table 3
presents the comparison results of DEVLoRe with three state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLM-based approaches. The row
below the names of these approaches lists the artifacts used by each approach. Among them, SoapFL [34] uses
codebase, failed test methods, and error stack trace; AutoFL [18] uses failed test methods along with error stack
trace; and Agentless [40] uses codebase and issue message. In contrast to these approaches, DEVLoRe utilizes

                                                                                                          ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
12   •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


                          Table 3. Method-level FL comparison with SOTA baselines on Defects4J v1.2

                                     DEVLoRe*               SoapFL [34]            AutoFL [18]           Agentless [40]
             Project   #Bugs   codebase, issue         codebase, failed       failed tests, error   codebase, issue
                               content, failed         tests, error stack     stack                 message
                               tests, error stack
                               Top1 Top3 Top5 Top1 Top3 Top5 Top1 Top3 Top5 Top1 Top3 Top5
              Chart      26      18        18      18    17       22       22   16      20       21   10      15       16
              Lang       65      54        58      58    39       48       49   35      43       43   34      40       48
              Math      106      81        86      86    57       71       73   53      67       70   45      51       52
              Time       27      12        13      13    10       13       13   14      15       16    8      10       12
             Mockito     38      22        22      22    20       21       22   13      17       17   21      26       26
             Closure    133      26       37      41     32       57      57   18       24       24   18      31       31
             Overall    395     213       234     238   175      232      236  149     186      191  136     173      185
                     *: To ensure a fair comparison, DEVLoRe uses the same GPT-3.5 model as the other baselines.




four artifacts: issue content, error stack, failed tests, and codebase. Failed tests and codebase are used to retrieve
related methods via MethodRecorder. It is worth to mention that DEVLoRe also outperform the SOTA learning-
based approaches such as GRACE [29] and FLUCCS [38]. But in this study we focused on how various artifacts can
help LLMs with bug localization and program repair, so we did not include the comparison with non-LLM-based
approaches. Since the other three baselines use the GPT-3.5 model, for a fair comparison, DEVLoRe also uses the
same GPT-3.5 model. As we can see, DEVLoRe outperforms SoapFL, AutoFL and Agentless in Top-1, Top-3 and
Top-5 metrics. The last row shows that, DEVLoRe outperforms other approaches in Top-1 and achieves similar
performance in Top-3 and Top-5 with SoapFL, demonstrating its ability to precisely localize buggy methods.

5.1.2 Localizing Buggy Line(s). To evaluate LLMs’ ability in localizing buggy lines, we provide the LLM with the
buggy method(s) baseline (i.e., the ground truth which can be extracted from human developer’s correct patch)
and ask the LLM to predict which lines are buggy. If the line number generated by the LLM exactly matches
the first line added in the human developer’s correct patch in Defects4J, we consider it an exact match. If the
predicted line number falls within a range of 𝑛 lines from the first added line in the human developer’s patch (for
example, if the correct patch starts at Line 368, and the LLM’s prediction falls within the range from 368 − 𝑛 to
368 + 𝑛), we classify it as a Range-n match.
    Table 4 shows the effectiveness of buggy line localization with different artifacts. We can see that when the
LLM is fed with issue content, it performs the best among all single software artifacts, achieving 49.5% in exact
matches, 74.4% in Range-3, and 77.5% in Range-5 for single methods. When adding more software artifacts, the
performance does not appear to improve. For example, combining issue content with the error stack does not
yield better exact, Range-3, or Range-5 buggy line matches for single methods compared to using issue content
alone. However, as seen from Figure 8, the combination does successfully localize 3 additional buggy lines that
cannot be identified using either issue content or the error stack individually. The last row indicates that, when
combining all artifacts, 68.9% of buggy lines in single-method bugs and 9% of buggy lines in non-single-method
bugs are correctly localized. Similar to Figure 7, Figure 8 demonstrates that, while most of the correctly localized
buggy lines across different artifacts overlap, different combinations of artifacts each have their own advantages
(since only five areas can be displayed in the overlap figure, we randomly select five categories for visualization).
For example, using only the issue content can correctly localize 7 more buggy lines, while using only the debug
information can localize 15 more.

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                            Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair   •   13


                     Table 4. Effectiveness of buggy line localization with different software artifacts

                                                      Match       Single Method         Non-Single
                                                       Exact           40.3%               4.3%
                                    —                 Range-3          68.1%               8.1%
                                                      Range-5          72.8%               9.8%
                                                       Exact           49.5%               5.2%
                                  Issue               Range-3          74.4%               9.2%
                                                      Range-5          77.5%              11.0%
                                                       Exact           45.0%               4.9%
                                  Stack               Range-3          66.9%               9.0%
                                                      Range-5          71.0%              10.1%
                                                       Exact           39.9%               3.5%
                                 Debug                Range-3          65.4%               6.4%
                                                      Range-5          70.3%               8.1%
                                                       Exact           44.8%               5.2%
                             Stack + Debug            Range-3          66.9%               9.0%
                                                      Range-5          70.3%              10.7%
                                                       Exact           50.1%               5.2%
                             Issue + Debug            Range-3          70.3%               8.4%
                                                      Range-5          73.2%               9.8%
                                                       Exact           49.1%               5.5%
                             Issue + Stack            Range-3          73.2%              10.1%
                                                      Range-5          77.5%              11.8%
                                                       Exact           50.3%               5.2%
                        Issue + Stack + Debug         Range-3          71.4%              11.3%
                                                      Range-5          73.8%              12.7%
                                                       Exact           68.9%               9.0%
                                 Union                Range-3          83.8%              16.5%
                                                      Range-5          85.7%              19.1%


      Answer to RQ1: Among all three types of single software artifacts, issue content is the most effective in
      assisting the LLM with bug localization. Furthermore, different types of software artifacts complement
      each other in localizing buggy methods and buggy lines. This aligns with how human developers typically
      approach bug localization, as they often rely on information from multiple sources to identify bugs.


5.2     RQ2. Program Repair Based on Provided Method-level Fault Localization
    To evaluate the effectiveness of program repair, we first extract buggy methods from human’s correct patches
and used these buggy methods as the baseline. Then we use DebugRecorder to get the debug information in
these buggy methods. Finally, we provide the LLM with different artifacts and check how many plausible patches
(passing all tests) it could generate.
    Table 5 shows that, error stack achieves the best performance in generating plausible patches for single-
method bugs (27.0%) among all three software artifacts, while issue content performs the best for non-single
buggy methods. If feeding the LLM with all three types of software artifacts, we can get the best performance,

                                                                                                ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
14   •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang




                                                                                          Stack
                                                                                12

                                                                            3             2
                                            Issue                                3                                         Debug
                                                              4 3                             3
                                                                    9                 9
                                                                                                       0                                 Issue
                                                    7
                                                              1                                                      15                  Stack
                                                                                                   4
                                                         2                                                                               Debug
                                                                                125                                                      Issue+Debug
                                                                                                  17           8                         Issue+Stack
                                                         3 4                                               2
                                                         7
                                                                  12                  20           8
                                                                                36
                                                                        7       4 5
                                                              3                               7
                                           Issue+Stack                                                              Issue+Debug




                      Fig. 8. Buggy line localization exact match with different artifacts in Defects4J v2.0


Table 5. Plausible patch with provided method-level fault localization in                                                                                   Debug
Defects4J v2.0                                                                                                                                        10

                                                                                                                                                  4         11
                                                                                                                   Issue                              4                                 Stack
                                    Single Method            Non Single                                                             3 1                       5
                                                                                                                                          1                25
                                                                                                                                                                       6                         Issue
                                                                                                                           13
                    —               46/489=9.4%              4/345=1.2%                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                   17            Debug
                                                                                                                                0                                                                Stack
                  Issue             127/478=26.6%            14/337=4.2%                                                                              31                                         Issue+Stack
                                                                                                                                                                  22           1                 Issue+Debug
                 Stack              132/489=27.0%            13/345=3.8%                                                         3 5                                       1
                                                                                                                                16
                 Debug              114/468=24.4%            11/326=3.4%                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                      12   21        8
              Issue+Stack           159/464=34.3%            21/328=6.4%                                                            23
                                                                                                                                              4       5 22
                                                                                                                                                                10
             Issue+Debug            191/457=41.8%            24/318=7.6%                                   Issue+Debug                                                             Issue+Stack

            Stack+Debug             139/462=30.1%            14/321=4.4%
         Issue+Stack+Debug          197/457=43.1%            30/318=9.4%
                 Union              274/489=56.0%            50/346=14.5%                                  Fig. 9. Overlap of program repair with different
                                                                                                           artifacts in Defects4J v2.0


which is 43.1% and 9.4% in patching single-method bugs and non-single-method bugs, respectively. Figure 9
shows that different artifacts complement each other in program repair. Error stack can help the LLM fix 17 extra
bugs while issue content can fix 13 extra bugs. Combining issue content with debug info can assist the LLM in
fixing 23 extra bugs.
    Table 6 compares DEVLoRe with other state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLM-based program repair approaches. Since
these approaches focus on repairing single-method bugs, we evaluate our tool on the same dataset for a fair
comparison. The row below the names of these approaches lists the artifacts used by each approach. Specifically,
GiantRepair [24] and Repilot [39] take the buggy function as input; RepairAgent [6] uses the failed tests
and all methods in the codebase; ChatRepair [44] uses the failed tests and the buggy line; and FitRepair [41]
uses only the buggy lines within the buggy method. In contrast, DEVLoRe leverages four artifacts including
the buggy method, debugging information, stack traces, and issue content. As shown in Table 6, 142 out of 259
bugs in Defects4J v1.2 and 132 out of 230 bugs in Defects4J v2.0 can be repaired by DEVLoRe, outperforming

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                               Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair                                  •   15




                                                                           GiantRepair
                                                                     21

                                                                 0             5
                                 DEVLoRe                             3                                      FitRepair
                                                      37 0                         1
                                                             9             4
                                                                                           6                            DEVLoRe
                                           88
                                                      6                                                11               GiantRepair
                                                                                       0
                                                 10                                                                     FitRepair
                                                                     23                                                 Repilot
                                                                                       8           4                    RepairAgent
                                                  8 26                                         5
                                                 27
                                                          19                3          2
                                                                     3
                                                               11    0 1
                                                      7                            0
                                   RepairAgent                                                         Repilot



          Fig. 10. A Comparison between DEVLoRe with other LLM-based SOTA program repair approaches



the other five LLM-based approaches. In total, DEVLoRe can fix 274 buggy methods, which is 60.2% more
than GiantRepair [24]. Furthermore, Figure 10 shows that 88 bugs can only be fixed by DEVLoRe. This result
demonstrates DEVLoRe’s ability in fixing more and extra bugs by leveraging different types of software artifacts.

       Table 6. Plausible patches with provided method-level fault localization in single buggy method projects

                                  DEVLoRe                    GaintRe-           RepairAgent                      ChatRepair       FitRepair        Repilot
          Project       #Bugs
                                                             pair
                                  buggy method,              buggy              failed tests,                    failed tests,    buggy lines      buggy
                                  issue     content,         method             all methods                      buggy lines      within buggy     method
                                  debugging info,                               in codebase                                       method
                                  stack traces
           Chart          16      12                         8                  11                               15               8                6
         Closure          95      37                         32                 27                               37               29               21
           Lang           42      32                         14                 17                               21               17               15
           Math           74      53                         26                 29                               32               23               20
           Time           16      3                          1                  2                                6                3                2
         Mockito          16      10                         6                  6                                3                4                0
       Defects4J v1.2    259      142                        87                 74                               114              85               64
       Defects4J v2.0    230      132                        84                 90                               48               44               47
           Total         489      274                        171                164                              162              129              111




   Answer to RQ2: Among all three types of single software artifacts, error stack is the most effective in
   assisting the LLM with program repair with provided buggy method localization. Different combination
   of software artifacts complement each other in generating plausible patches and combining all three
   artifacts can achieve 56.0% of program repair, outperforming the SOTA approaches in program repair.


                                                                                                                                      ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
16    •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


5.3       RQ3. End-to-end Performance from Code Repository to Program Repair
    Currently, most of LLM-based approaches focus on either fault localization or program repair based on
the already-localized buggy methods. We investigated RQ1 and RQ2 to compare with these approaches. In
contrast, our DEVLoRe fully relies on LLMs for both fault localization and program repair. Furthermore, from
fault localization to program repair, we not only provide the LLM with the localized buggy method signatures
and lines, but also supply it with the complete method body. When the LLM is asked for the program repair task,
it may reconsider and repair other parts of the code beyond the specified buggy location. Therefore, the overall
end-to-end performance from the buggy code without localization to a complete program repair cannot be simply
calculated by multiplying the fault localization rate by the program repair rate. Conducting a comprehensive
end-to-end assessment can offer a better understanding of DEVLoRe’s performance throughout the entire fault
localization and program repair process.
    Table 7 shows DEVLoRe’s end-to-end performance with different software artifacts. When using issue content
alone, the LLM can repair 21.8% of bugs, which is the highest among all single software artifacts. This result is
also consistent with Agentless [40], one of the best approaches in SWE-bench lite (with Python projects) [4],
which relies solely on issue descriptions to assist LLMs in resolving GitHub issues.
    Furthermore, by combining issue content with debugging information and the error stack, the LLM can fix an
additional 1.2% and 4.0% of single-method bugs, respectively. When all three software artifacts are combined, the
LLM can repair 28.0% of single-method bugs and 11.2% of non-single-method bugs. Furthermore, the combination
of different artifacts achieves an end-to-end 39.7% fix rate for single-method bugs and 17.1% for non-single-method
bugs. Figure 11 shows similar observations as other two RQs, that different combinations of software artifacts
can complement each other in the end-to-end process of bug localization and program repair.


                                                                                                                              Debug
      Table 7. End-to-end plausible patch in Defects4J v2.0                                                         6

                                                                                                                3             6
                              Single Method       Non Single                     Issue                              0                                   Stack
                                                                                                  2 1                             2
                                                                                                        0                 2
                                                                                                                                       16
            —                 23/488=4.7%         6/346=1.7%                             9
                                                                                                  0                                                21
                                                                                                                                                                 Issue
                                                                                                                                       2                         Debug
          Issue               103/473=21.8%       30/335=9.0%                                 3
                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                 Stack
                                                                                                                                                                 Issue+Debug
         Debug                38/413=9.2%         3/295=1.0%                                   6 2
                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                               3                 Issue+Stack
         Stack                83/488=17.0%        14/346=4.0%                                 14
                                                                                                       0                  45          14
     Issue+Debug              92/400=23.0%        30/283=10.6%                                                      3
                                                                                                            2       0 6
      Issue+Stack             123/477=25.8%       31/338=9.2%                                     22                              9
                                                                                Issue+Stack                                                        Issue+Debug
    Stack+Debug               73/413=17.7%        13/295=4.4%
 Issue+Stack+Debug            114/407=28.0%       33/295=11.2%
         Union                194/489=39.7%       59/346=17.1%                   Fig. 11. Overlap of the overall performance in De-
                                                                                 fects4J v2.0


     We divide the time spent on each process by the number of fixed bugs to calculate the average time required
to fix a bug. Table 8 shows the average time spent to fix a bug in each process of DEVLoRe using our hardware
device (Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8352V CPU 2.10GHz, 120GB RAM). We observe that the entire localization and
repair process takes approximately 15 seconds, with the evaluation of patches being the most time-consuming
step, as it involves running all relevant tests. Additionally, since we select the most cost-efficient GPT-4o-mini
model, the average cost to fix a bug is $0.057. We calculate this by dividing the total cost of using the LLM when
issue content, error stack, and debug information are provided by the number of plausible patches generated,
which is 147.

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                          Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair   •   17


                                   Table 8. Time spent on each process of DEVLoRe

                                     Process                                     Time Spent (On Average)
                  Extract Related Methods by MethodRecorder                               ≈ 5s
                         Localize Buggy Methods by LLM                                    <1s
                Extract Debugging Information by DebugRecorder                            ≈ 5s
                          Localize Buggy Lines by LLM                                     <2s
                            Generate Patches by LLM                                       <2s
              Evaluate Plausible Patches by the Defects4J framework                      ≈ 300s
                                      Total                                              ≈ 315s

   Using our DEVLoRe framework for this end-to-end software maintenance activity, 253 (194 for single buggy
methods and 59 for non-single buggy methods) plausible patches can be generated. To the best of our knowledge,
DEVLoRe outperforms all current SOTA end-to-end approaches in the Defects4J dataset (the plausible rate of
Toggle [12] is 24.2% for 58/240 single-hunk bugs and the plausible rate of FixAgent [23] without Web search
engine is 245/835=29.3% at a cost of $0.364 per bug).

   Answer to RQ3: Among the three types of software artifacts, issue content is the most effective in
   assisting the LLM throughout the end-to-end process, from code repository analysis to fault localization
   and program repair. Different combinations of software artifacts complement each other, enhancing the
   overall bug localization and repair process. Moreover, our DEVLoRe framework can effectively fix bugs
   at a low cost and within a reasonable time frame.

6 DISCUSSION
6.1 Analysis of Results
6.1.1 A simple but efficient framework: Unlike approaches that rely on patch skeletons [24], fix templates [50],
or type checking [53], DEVLoRe adopts a straightforward framework that allows LLMs to handle both fault
localization and program repair with the aid of two lightweight tools we implemented MethodRecorder and
DebugRecorder, making it both simple and efficient. The findings of RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3 demonstrate that different
software artifacts may lead to different performance in bug localization or program repair. Also, because there is
no constraints such as fill-in-the-blank templates or code skeletons for generating patches [24, 50], DEVLoRe can
fix bugs that other tools cannot, especially some non-single method bugs. Our results in Table 7 show that by
combining issue content, stack error, and debug information, our approach can fix 11.2% of non-single method
bugs. More importantly, combinations of software artifacts can achieve the best performance in all experiments:
bug localization, program repair, and the overall streamlined process. One explanation for the strong performance
of DEVLoRe is that by integrating multiple sources of information, the noise inherent in any single source can be
significantly reduced [31]. This allows the LLM to focus on the consistent and complementary aspects of the
different artifacts, enabling it to perform more effective reasoning and making better use of the available data.
While it may be argued that the good results of DEVLoRe are due to the use of GPT-4o models, a recent study
shows that directly using the GPT-4o model does not improve the fix rate [24]. Therefore, we argue that our
proposed framework is the key to achieving the high rate in fault localization and program repair.
6.1.2 A strict input/output prompt design: Table 1 presents the prompts used in our DEVLoRe framework. In
the general task prompt, the LLM is asked to act as a software engineer and conduct the review process,
helping the LLM form a clear understanding of the overall task. The input prompt includes various types

                                                                                              ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
18   •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


of software artifacts, with clear symbols denoting different hierarchy levels and structures. For example, the
{related_methods} in the input prompt wraps the class names in ### symbols, and the method signatures are
separated by line breaks. Also, the first line of {debugging_info} in the input prompt represents the currently
executed method line, and the second line represents the names and values of the variables in current context
(e.g., commons.lang3.math.NumberUtils:createNumber:468{hexDigits:8} represents that the code is about to execute
Line 468 and the value of the local variable hexDigits is 8). These strict formatting specifications helps the
LLM “understand” the structure of the various information from different software artifacts. The expected
output prompt is very strict in DEVLoRe. When localizing buggy methods, we ask the LLM to return a set of
buggy method or field locations in the format path.to.ClassA::methodA. For buggy lines, we request the LLM
to return a set of buggy line locations in the format path.to.ClassA line:20. During program repair, we employ
the well-known SEARCH/REPLACE method, which is commonly used in many state-of-the-art program repair
approaches [27, 32, 40, 51]. By enforcing this strict output format, it significantly reduces the likelihood of
hallucinations from the LLM. We believe that the clear and strict prompt design in our DEVLoRe framework has
helped the LLM achieve strong performance in fault localization and program repair.

                         Table 9. A comparison from plausible patch to correct patch in Defects4J v1.2

                             Project      DEVLoRe        GaintRepair [24]      Tare [53]   TBar [26]
                              Chart         7/12               7/10             11/14        7/10
                             Closure       10/16              16/33             12/23        6/10
                              Lang          8/16              12/19             12/19        4/11
                              Math         28/48              22/40             18/34       12/26
                              Time           0/2               1/3                2/3        1/2
                             Mockito        6/11               6/6                2/2        1/2
                              Total        59/105            64/111             57/95       31/61
                              P(%)         56.2%              57.7%             60.0%       50.8%
                              * X/Y denotes X correct patches and Y plausible patches.



6.1.3 Plausible patch to correct patch: Most state-of-the-art (SOTA) program repair approaches use plausible
patches that pass all unit tests as an important evaluation metric, since generating plausible patches within
limited time and resources is crucial for practical applications. To facilitate a better comparison, we also used
plausible patches in RQ2 (Which software artifacts can better assist LLMs in generating valid patches when
provided with buggy methods?) and RQ3 (What is the overall performance of DEVLoRe in bug localization and
program repair?). Some may argue that a high number of plausible patches does not necessarily translate to
a high number of semantically correct patches. To address this, we manually inspected the plausible patches,
using the approach described in Section 3.4. Table 9 compares the end-to-end repair results on Defects4J v1.2, as
all the baselines consistently used this benchmark. Our DEVLoRe framework uses the LLM to localize buggy
methods and lines, whereas all three approaches — GiantRepair [24], Tare [53], and TBar [26] — employ the
spectrum-based algorithm Ochiai [5], implemented by GZoltar [7], to localize buggy methods. As shown in
Table 9, the ratio of correct to plausible patches (56.2%) produced by our DEVLoRe is lower than that from Tare
(60.0%) and from GiantRepair (57.7%). This difference is understandable, as GiantRepair enforces an AST patch
skeleton and Tare uses a typing-checking mechanism. Notably, 59 out of 105 plausible patches generated by
DEVLoRe are evaluated as correct patches, which is higher than the 57 in Tare and 31 in TBar. This finding
demonstrates DEVLoRe’s ability to generate candidate patches that not only pass all unit tests but are also
semantically correct.

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                          Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair   •   19


         Table 10. Resolution rates of frameworks using a GPT-4o model on the SWE-bench Lite Leaderboards

                         Tool                       LLM                  Resolved/Selected     %Resolved
                      DEVLoRe                   GPT-4o-mini                   46/207              22.2%
                    SWE-agent [49]                GPT-4o                       55/300             18.3%
                   AppMap Navie [2]               GPT-4o                      65/300              21.7%
                       Aider [1]             GPT-4o+Claude-3                  79/300              26.3%
                     Agentless [40]               GPT-4o                       82/300             27.3%
                    MarsCode [27]     Multiple LLMs(includes GPT-4o)          118/300             39.3%



6.2   Comparison with Baselines of Different Models or on Different Languages


6.2.1 Comparison with Baselines of Different Models. We selected state-of-the-art LLM-based fault localization
and program repair frameworks on the Defects4J dataset as our baselines. One may argue that some baselines do
not use a GPT-4o model, and that the superior performance of our DEVLoRe framework is due to the use of a
more powerful model. However, as shown in Table 3, even using the same GPT-3.5 model as the baselines, our
framework outperforms existing state-of-the-art fault localization approaches. For program repair, the models
used in these baselines vary significantly. For example, GiantRepair and Repilot combine the outputs of multiple
LLMs, while FitRepair fine-tunes CodeT5 using 50% of the Defects4J dataset. As a result, it is challenging to
align all baselines under a single model. According to a recent study [8], GPT-4o achieves only 16.4% and 27.8%
accuracy at pass@1 and pass@5, respectively, in generating correct patches given a buggy function on the
Defects4J dataset. Additionally, as noted in the discussion section of the GiantRepair paper [24], given a buggy
function, GPT-4o-mini achieves 21.7% accuracy when generating 200 patches per bug on the Defects4J dataset
(pass@200). In contrast, DEVLoRe, which leverages issue content, error stack and debug information, achieves
56.0% accuracy in program repair using GPT-4o-mini (pass@30). We believe that this performance gap is due to
our framework’s ability to effectively leverage various software artifacts.


6.2.2 Comparison with Baselines on Different Programming Languages. Our framework was largely inspired by
Agentless. Initially, we attempted to apply Agentless to the Defects4J dataset, but the resolution rate was below
10%. This led us to consider incorporating debugging information and re-implementing Agentless for evaluation
on the Defects4J dataset. During this process, we encountered a major issue: Agentless uses only the skeleton of
the source files during the fault localization step, without incorporating the detailed source code. To address this
limitation and incorporate both debugging information and actual code lines, we extended the original Agentless
framework to include the full source code as input to the LLM. However, this introduced a new challenge: the
input frequently exceeded the LLM’s token limit. To overcome this, we introduced MethodRecorder, which
identifies and retains only the methods relevant to the failing test cases, thereby reducing the number of code
elements passed to the LLM. We also pruned the debug information by recording only variables that had changed
and cropping long arrays and lists to further reduce the token size. Without such adjustments or modifications
to Agentless—even when providing all the artifacts listed in this paper—its end-to-end performance remained
below 15%. This demonstrates that directly applying a leading program repair framework designed for Python
code to Java code does not yield competitive results.
    To compare with leading frameworks and evaluate DEVLoRe’s capability on Python code, we re-implemented
our framework and tested it on SWE-bench Lite. The first challenge we encountered was that, even after filtering
with MethodRecorder, the length of the related methods for one-third of the bugs in SWE-bench Lite still

                                                                                              ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
20    •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang




                                                                                Agentless
                                                                          7

                                                                      5          10
                                     DEVLoRe                              10                                MarsCode
                                                        0 0                        6
                                                              3                 18
                                                                                           4                       DEVLoRe
                                               9
                                                        1                                              30          Agentless
                                                                                        5
                                                    1                                                              MarsCode
                                                                          13                                       Aider
                                                                                       3           7               AppMap Native
                                                    1 3                                        3
                                                    2
                                                            2                   0       3
                                                                          2
                                                                  1       1 0
                                                        4                           6
                                    AppMap Native                                                      Aider




                           Fig. 12. A comparison between DEVLoRe with baselines on SWE-bench Lite



exceeded the LLM’s token limit. As a result, we were only able to provide related methods to the LLM for 207 out
of 300 bugs in SWE-bench Lite. Additionally, we observed that Python’s debugging information is significantly
more verbose than that of Java. For some bugs, the required patches involve modifying top-level constructs such
as imports or global variables, for which debugging information cannot be extracted by executing the test cases.
As shown in Table 10, among the 207 bugs with related methods information, DEVLoRe successfully fixed 46
(46/207=22.2%). We also provide a comparison with the SWE-bench Lite Leaderboards using the GPT-4o model.
The results in Table 10 shows that DEVLoRe did not outperform Agentless or SWE-agent or MarsCode in the
total number of fixed Python bugs. We suspect this is due to fundamental differences in coding practices between
Java and Python, which result in related methods or debugging information being unavailable for a portion of
the issues. Moreover, we compared the resolved issue IDs of DEVLoRe with those of baselines. The overlap of
resolved issues among the baselines and DEVLoRe in Figure 12 shows that DEVLoRe was able to resolve 9 unique
issues, despite resolving only 46 issues in total. Manual inspection of these 9 issues revealed that all of them
involved the use of debugging information. This result suggests that the debugging information automatically
extracted in our framework—among these baselines, only AppMap Naive utilizes runtime data when available in
an interactive way—shows promise in addressing a subset of issues. Moreover, this experiment highlights that
directly applying a leading framework from SWE-bench to Defects4J, or vice versa, may not yield state-of-the-art
results. Generalizing the framework across different programming languages will be part of our future work.

6.3       Threats to Validity
    The first threat to validity is the accuracy of the two tools we implemented: MethodRecorder and DebugRecorder.
Both tools rely on mature Java agent technology [3]. We randomly selected several projects and manually verified
the outputs of both tools. The manual inspection showed that the outputs were accurate. However, we did not
inspect all projects, which may pose a threat to the construct validity.
    Another potential threat is that the GPT-4o-mini model used in this work may have been trained on open-
source projects from GitHub, which could overlap with the Defects4J dataset, leading to possible data leakage.
To mitigate this, we also randomly selected 100 bugs from another dataset, GrowingBugs [16], and found the
plausible fixing rate to be 39%, which may help alleviate this concern. Additionally, the debugging information

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                           Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair   •   21


requires dynamic analysis, which is unlikely to have been used during the model’s training. Also as found in
[8, 24], directly using the GPT-4o model can not improve the fix rate.
    The final threat to external validity is that our systematic experiments used only one model and one approach,
although using GPT-3.5 in DEVLoRe also outperform SOTA fault localization approaches. But the findings may
not generalize to other models or approaches. We plan to explore this in our future work. Also, as discussed in
Section 6.2, generalizing our framework to other programming languages, such as Python, does not currently
achieve state-of-the-art performance. We plan to further improve and evaluate DEVLoRe on additional datasets
across multiple programming languages in our future work.

7 RELATED WORK
7.1 Large Language Models for Fault Localization
    Recently, there has been significant interest in using LLMs for fault localization. Toggle incorporated addi-
tional contextual information, such as the buggy line number or code review comments, and greatly enhances the
accuracy of predicting both the starting and ending buggy tokens [12]. AGENTFL employs a multi-agent system
based on ChatGPT and frames the fault localization task as a three-step process: comprehension, navigation, and
confirmation. In each step, AGENTFL deploys specialized agents, each with unique expertise, and uses different
tools to address specific tasks [34]. CrashTracker conducts static analysis to map each crash to the corresponding
exception instance and identify potential buggy candidates. It then utilizes LLMs to enhance the explainabil-
ity of the localization results [45]. Jiang et al. assessed the performance of recent commercial closed-source
general-purpose LLMs, such as ChatGPT 3.5, ERNIE Bot 3.5, and IFlytek Spark 2.0, on line-level fault localization
with the provided buggy method [15]. LLMAO fine-tunes LLMs with 350M, 6B, and 16B parameters on small,
curated corpora like Defects4J, improving Top-1 fault localization by 2.3%-54.4% and Top-5 results by 14.4%-35.6%,
compared to the state-of-the-art machine learning fault localization [46]. AutoFL prompts an LLM to use function
calls for navigating a repository, enabling effective fault localization in large codebases while overcoming the
LLM context length limit. It also generates an explanation of the bug and suggests a fault location [18]. LLM4FL
combines traditional spectrum-based fault localization with prompt chaining to divide large coverage data into
manageable groups. By employing multiple LLM agents, it navigates the codebase more effectively to localize
faults [35]. Like LLM4FL and AutoFL which combines transitional fault localization tools, DEVLoRe incorporates
a static code analysis tool, MethodRecorder, to identify relevant buggy methods in a lightweight manner by
invoking failing tests. However, unlike the above approaches, we provide the LLM with a combination of software
artifacts, including issue content, error stack traces, and debugging information, which are commonly used by
human developers for fault localization. This enables DEVLoRe to outperform state-of-the-art fault localization
methods with greater efficiency and lower cost.

7.2   Large Language Models for Program Repair
     Recent studies have extensively explored the use of LLMs for program repair. ChatRepair initially provides
the LLM with relevant test failure information and then learns from both the failures and successes of previous
patching attempts for the same bug, enhancing its ability for more effective APR [44]. GAMMA converts various
fix templates into mask patterns and leverages a pre-trained language model to predict the correct code for the
masked portions, treating APR as a fill-in-the-blank task [50]. Repilot generates a candidate patch by combining
LLM suggestions with a Completion Engine, removing infeasible tokens and filling in gaps proactively [39].
FitRepair integrates the plastic surgery hypothesis into LLM-based APR, combining the direct use of LLMs with
two domain-specific fine-tuning strategies and one prompting strategy to enhance its repair capabilities. It can
directly generate the correct code in context, effectively “filling in the blanks” of missing code lines or hunks [41].
Tare incorporated type checking into neural program repair model and can successfully repair 62 and 32 bugs

                                                                                               ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
22   •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


from Defects4J v1.2 and Defects4J v2.0 [53]. GiantRepair creates patch skeletons from LLM-generated patches
to narrow the patch space, then generates context-aware, high-quality patches by instantiating these skeletons
for specific programs [24]. FixAgent unifies debugging through multi-agent collaboration and achieves strong
performance with a three-layer hierarchical structure, where the final layer involves the use of a Web search
engine [23]. MORepair fine-tunes LLMs for program repair by adapting both to the syntactic nuances of code
transformation and the underlying logic of code changes, enabling the generation of high-quality patches [48].
To leverage LLMs’ capabilities and augmented information, CREF is a semi-automatic repair framework for
programming tutors, highlighting the potential for enhancing LLMs’ repair capabilities through tutor interactions
and historical conversations [47]. RepairLLaMA is an innovative program repair method that finds optimal code
representations for APR using fine-tuned models, and introduces a state-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning
technique (PEFT) for program repair [36]. Our approach differs from the aforementioned approaches in two
key ways. First, we do not rely on fill-in-the-blank templates or skeletons for generating patches, which helps
avoid patch overfitting problems in program repair [10, 20, 37]. Second, our fault localization step allows for the
identification of multiple buggy methods, which are then fed into the LLM’s repair process along with various
software artifacts. This provides flexibility to address not only single-method bugs but also bugs spanning across
different methods. As seen in Table 7, the end-to-end process from localization to repair can generate plausible
patches for 17.1% of non-single-method bugs, while most existing program repair approaches primarily target
single-method bugs. A recent study [33] investigated how to identify an optimal set of facts to maximize the
performance of LLM-based program repair. Their framework adopts chain-of-thought prompts, uses artifacts
from both the fixed (correct) and buggy programs, and is evaluated on the BugsInPy dataset. Complementary
to their work, we show that extracting all artifacts solely from the buggy version—which can be found in most
development scenarios—and using direct prompts can still yield effective results on both the Defects4J dataset
and SWE-bench Lite. Moreover, our paper demonstrates that different combinations of artifacts can enhance one
another, helping LLMs on both fault localization and program repair.


8    CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
    This paper presents an LLM-based framework, DEVLoRe, for streamlining fault localization and program
repair. By mimicking human developers in addressing bug problems and integrating three different software
artifacts, DEVLoRe demonstrates strong performance in both fault localization and program repair, outperforming
current state-of-the-art approaches in terms of bug fixing rate, time, and cost on the Defects4J dataset. In addition,
unlike more rigid approaches that ask LLMs to fill in the blank within a single buggy method or use the fix
template, DEVLoRe feed the LLM with only different software artifacts and there are no constraints on the
DEVLoRe framework regarding how it repairs bugs, DEVLoRe has shown significant potential in handling bugs
that span across multiple methods.
    Our future work will focus on the following directions: First, expanding DEVLoRe to support additional
programming languages such as Python and C/C++, and evaluating and improving its effectiveness on projects
written in these languages. Second, testing the DEVLoRe framework with a broader range of software arti-
facts—such as commit history, code review comments, and user documentation—to assess how these additional
data sources can further enhance the bug localization and program repair process. Third, conducting a systematic
evaluation involving multiple approaches and LLMs to better assess DEVLoRe’s generalization capabilities.


DATA AVAILABILITY
  The source code and experimental results of this work for replication are available at https://github.com/
XYZboom/DEVLoRe.

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair       •   23


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
   This work has been partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) with Grant
No. 62172311 and the Major Science and Technology Project of Hubei Province under Grant No. 2024BAA008.
The numerical calculations in this paper have been done on the supercomputing system in the Supercomputing
Center of Wuhan University.


REFERENCES
 [1] [n. d.]. Aider. https://aider.chat.
 [2] [n. d.]. AppMap Navie. https://appmap.io/product/appmap-navie.html.
 [3] [n. d.]. Instrumentation documents in Java SE 8. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/instrument/Instrumentation.html
 [4] 2024. SWE-bench Lite. https://www.swebench.com/lite.html.
 [5] Rui Abreu, Peter Zoeteweij, and Arjan JC Van Gemund. 2007. On the accuracy of spectrum-based fault localization. In Proccedings of the
     Testing: Academic and Industrial Conference Practice and Research Techniques-MUTATION (TAICPART-MUTATION). ACM, 89–98.
 [6] Islem Bouzenia, Premkumar Devanbu, and Michael Pradel. 2024. RepairAgent: An Autonomous, LLM-Based Agent for Program Repair.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17134 (2024).
 [7] José Campos, André Riboira, Alexandre Perez, and Rui Abreu. 2012. Gzoltar: an eclipse plug-in for testing and debugging. In Proceedings
     of the 27th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 378–381.
 [8] Viola Campos, Ridwan Shariffdeen, Adrian Ulges, and Yannic Noller. 2025. Empirical Evaluation of Generalizable Automated Program
     Repair with Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03283 (2025).
 [9] Zimin Chen, Steve Kommrusch, Michele Tufano, Louis-Noël Pouchet, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Martin Monperrus. 2019. SequenceR:
     Sequence-to-Sequence Learning for End-to-End Program Repair. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 47, 9 (2019), 1943–1959.
[10] Zhiwei Fei, Jidong Ge, Chuanyi Li, Tianqi Wang, Yuning Li, Haodong Zhang, LiGuo Huang, and Bin Luo. 2025. Patch Correctness
     Assessment: A Survey. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 34, 2 (2025), Article No.: 55.
[11] Ali Ghanbari, Samuel Benton, and Lingming Zhang. 2019. Practical program repair via bytecode mutation. In Proceedings of the 28th
     ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). ACM, 19–30.
[12] Soneya Binta Hossain, Nan Jiang, Qiang Zhou, Xiaopeng Li, Wen-Hao Chiang, Yingjun Lyu, Hoan Nguyen, and Omer Tripp. 2024. A
     Deep Dive into Large Language Models for Automated Bug Localizatio an Repair. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering 1,
     FSE (2024), 1471–1493.
[13] Nan Jiang, Kevin Liu, Thibaud Lutellier, and Lin Tan. 2023. Impact of code language models on automated program repair. In Proceedings
     of the 45th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1430–1442.
[14] Nan Jiang, Thibaud Lutellier, and Lin Tan. 2021. Cure: Code-aware neural machine translation for automatic program repair. In
     Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1161–1173.
[15] Shengbei Jiang, Jiabao Zhang, Wei Chen, Bo Wang, Jianyi Zhou, and Jie Zhang. 2024. Evaluating Fault Localization and Program Repair
     Capabilities of Existing Closed-Source General-Purpose LLMs. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Large Language Models
     for Code (LLM4Code). ACM, 75–78.
[16] Yanjie Jiang, Hui Liu, Xiaoqing Luo, Zhihao Zhu, Xiaye Chi, Nan Niu, Yuxia Zhang, Yamin Hu, Pan Bian, and Lu Zhang. 2022. Bugbuilder:
     An automated approach to building bug repository. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49, 4 (2022), 1443–1463.
[17] René Just, Darioush Jalali, and Michael D Ernst. 2014. Defects4J: A database of existing faults to enable controlled testing studies for
     Java programs. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). ACM, 437–440.
[18] Sungmin Kang, Gabin An, and Shin Yoo. 2024. A quantitative and qualitative evaluation of LLM-based explainable fault localization.
     Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering 1, FSE (2024), 1424–1446.
[19] Xuan Bach D. Le, David Lo, and Claire Le Goues. 2016. History driven program repair. In Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE International
     Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 213–224.
[20] Xuan-Bach D Le, Ferdian Thung, David Lo, and Claire Le Goues. 2018. Overfitting in semantics-based automated program repair. In
     Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). ACM, 163–163.
[21] Claire Le Goues, ThanhVu Nguyen, Stephanie Forrest, and Westley Weimer. 2011. GenProg: A Generic Method for Automatic Software
     Repair. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 38, 1 (2011), 54–72.
[22] Claire Le Goues, Michael Pradel, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2019. Automated program repair. Commun. ACM 62, 12 (2019), 56–65.
[23] Cheryl Lee, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Longji Yang, Jen-tse Huang, Zhouruixin Zhu, Lingming Zhang, and Michael R Lyu. 2024. A unified
     debugging approach via llm-based multi-agent synergy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17153 (2024).
[24] Fengjie Li, Jiajun Jiang, Jiajun Sun, and Hongyu Zhang. 2025. Hybrid automated program repair by combining large language models
     and program analysis. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (2025).


                                                                                                        ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
24   •   Qiong Feng, Xiaotian Ma, Jiayi Sheng, Ziyuan Feng, Wei Song, and Peng Liang


[25] Yi Li, Shaohua Wang, and Tien N. Nguyen. 2020. DLFix: context-based code transformation learning for automated program repair. In
     Proceedings of the 42nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). ACM, 602–614.
[26] Kui Liu, Anil Koyuncu, Dongsun Kim, and Tegawendé F. Bissyandé. 2019. TBar: revisiting template-based automated program repair. In
     Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). ACM, 31–42.
[27] Yizhou Liu, Pengfei Gao, Xinchen Wang, Jie Liu, Yexuan Shi, Zhao Zhang, and Chao Peng. 2024. MarsCode Agent: AI-native Automated
     Bug Fixing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00899 (2024).
[28] Fan Long and Martin Rinard. 2015. Staged program repair with condition synthesis. In Proceedings of the 10th Joint Meeting on
     Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM, 166–178.
[29] Yiling Lou, Qihao Zhu, Jinhao Dong, Xia Li, Zeyu Sun, Dan Hao, Lu Zhang, and Lingming Zhang. 2021. Boosting coverage-based fault
     localization via graph-based representation learning. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering
     Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM, 664–676.
[30] Sergey Mechtaev, Jooyong Yi, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2016. Angelix: scalable multiline program patch synthesis via symbolic analysis.
     In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). ACM, 691–701.
[31] Xiangxin Meng, Zexiong Ma, Pengfei Gao, and Chao Peng. 2024. An Empirical Study on LLM-based Agents for Automated Bug Fixing.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10213 (2024).
[32] Siru Ouyang, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Zilin Xiao, Zhihan Zhang, Mengzhao Jia, Jiawei Han, Hongming Zhang, and Dong Yu. 2024.
     RepoGraph: Enhancing AI Software Engineering with Repository-level Code Graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14684 (2024).
[33] Nikhil Parasaram, Huijie Yan, Boyu Yang, Zineb Flahy, Abriele Qudsi, Damian Ziaber, Earl Barr, and Sergey Mechtaev. 2024. The fact
     selection problem in LLM-based program repair. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05520 (2024).
[34] Yihao Qin, Shangwen Wang, Yiling Lou, Jinhao Dong, Kaixin Wang, Xiaoling Li, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2025. SoapFL: A Standard
     Operating Procedure for LLM-based Method-Level Fault Localization. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 51, 4 (2025), 1173–1187.
[35] Md Nakhla Rafi, Dong Jae Kim, Tse-Hsun Chen, and Shaowei Wang. 2024. Enhancing Fault Localization Through Ordered Code Analysis
     with LLM Agents and Self-Reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.13642 (2024).
[36] André Silva, Sen Fang, and Martin Monperrus. 2023. Repairllama: Efficient representations and fine-tuned adapters for program repair.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15698 (2023).
[37] Edward K Smith, Earl T Barr, Claire Le Goues, and Yuriy Brun. 2015. Is the cure worse than the disease? overfitting in automated
     program repair. In Proceedings of the 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM, 532–543.
[38] Jeongju Sohn and Shin Yoo. 2017. Fluccs: Using code and change metrics to improve fault localization. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
     SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). ACM, 273–283.
[39] Yuxiang Wei, Chunqiu Steven Xia, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Copiloting the copilots: Fusing large language models with completion
     engines for automated program repair. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium
     on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM, 172–184.
[40] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Agentless: Demystifying LLM-based Software Engineering
     Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01489 (2024).
[41] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yifeng Ding, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. The Plastic Surgery Hypothesis in the Era of Large Language Models. In
     Proceedings of the 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 522–534.
[42] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Matteo Paltenghi, Jia Le Tian, Michael Pradel, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Fuzz4All: Universal Fuzzing with Large
     Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04748 (2024).
[43] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Automated program repair in the era of large pre-trained language
     models. In Proceedings of the 45th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1482–1494.
[44] Chunqiu Steven Xia and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Keep the Conversation Going: Fixing 162 out of 337 bugs for $0.42 each using ChatGPT.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.00385 (2023).
[45] Jiwei Yan, Jinhao Huang, Chunrong Fang, Jun Yan, and Jian Zhang. 2024. Better Debugging: Combining Static Analysis and LLMs for
     Explainable Crashing Fault Localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12070 (2024).
[46] Aidan Z. H. Yang, Claire Le Goues, Ruben Martins, and Vincent Hellendoorn. 2024. Large Language Models for Test-Free Fault
     Localization. In Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). ACM, 1–12.
[47] Boyang Yang, Haoye Tian, Weiguo Pian, Haoran Yu, Haitao Wang, Jacques Klein, Tegawendé F Bissyandé, and Shunfu Jin. 2024. Cref:
     An LLM-based conversational software repair framework for programming tutors. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International
     Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). ACM, 882–894.
[48] Boyang Yang, Haoye Tian, Jiadong Ren, Hongyu Zhang, Jacques Klein, Tegawendé F Bissyandé, Claire Le Goues, and Shunfu Jin. 2024.
     Multi-Objective Fine-Tuning for Enhanced Program Repair with LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12636 (2024).
[49] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent:
     Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024),
     50528–50652.



ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                               Integrating Various Software Artifacts for Better LLM-based Bug Localization and Program Repair     •   25


[50] Quanjun Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Tongke Zhang, Bowen Yu, Weisong Sun, and Zhenyu Chen. 2023. Gamma: Revisiting template-based
     automated program repair via mask prediction. In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
     Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 535–547.
[51] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. Autocoderover: Autonomous program improvement. In
     Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). ACM, 1592–1604.
[52] Qihao Zhu, Zeyu Sun, Yuan-an Xiao, Wenjie Zhang, Kang Yuan, Yingfei Xiong, and Lu Zhang. 2021. A syntax-guided edit decoder for
     neural program repair. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
     Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM, 341–353.
[53] Qihao Zhu, Zeyu Sun, Wenjie Zhang, Yingfei Xiong, and Lu Zhang. 2023. Tare: Type-aware neural program repair. In Proceedings of the
     45th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1443–1455.




                                                                                                      ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
