                                                                                                        PDF Download
                                                                                                        3729356.pdf
                                                                                                        04 April 2026
                                                                                                        Total Citations: 1
                                                                                                        Total Downloads:
    .
    .
                                                                                                        1333
        Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3729356




                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                        .
        .
                                                                                                Published: 19 June 2025
        .
    RESEARCH-ARTICLE                                                                            Accepted: 01 April 2025
    A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug                                           Received: 13 September 2024




                                                                                                .
    Localization




                                                                                                .
                                                                                                Citation in BibTeX format




                                                                                                .
                                                                                                .
    YUE LI, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    BOHAN LIU, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    TING ZHANG, Singapore Management University, Singapore City,
    Singapore
    .
    ZHIQI WANG, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    DAVID LO, Singapore Management University, Singapore City, Singapore
    .
    LANXIN YANG, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
    .
    View all
    .
    .
    Open Access Support provided by:
    .
    Nanjing University
    .
    Singapore Management University
    .
                                             Proceedings of the ACM on Soware Engineering, Volume 2, Issue FSE (June 2025)
                                                                                            hps://doi.org/10.1145/3729356
                                                                                                          EISSN: 2994-970X
.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug
Localization
YUE LI, Nanjing University, China
BOHAN LIU, Nanjing University, China
TING ZHANG, Singapore Management University, Singapore
ZHIQI WANG, Nanjing University, China
DAVID LO, Singapore Management University, Singapore
LANXIN YANG,* Nanjing University, China
JUN LYU, Nanjing University, China
HE ZHANG∗ , Nanjing University, China
A significant number of bug reports are generated every day as software systems continue to develop.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have been used to correlate bug reports with source code to locate bugs
automatically. The existing research has shown that LLMs are effective for bug localization and can increase
software development efficiency. However, these studies still have two limitations. First, these models fail to
capture context information about bug reports and source code. Second, these models are unable to understand
the domain-specific expertise inherent to particular projects, such as version information in projects that are
composed of alphanumeric characters without any semantic meaning.
   To address these challenges, we propose a Knowledge Enhanced Pre-Trained model using project documents
and historical code, called Kept, for bug localization. Project documents record, revise, and restate project
information that provides rich semantic information about those projects. Historical code contains rich code
semantic information that can enhance the reasoning ability of LLMs. Specifically, we construct knowledge
graphs from project documents and source code. Then, we introduce knowledge graphs to the LLM through
soft-position embedding and visible matrices, enhancing its contextual and professional reasoning ability. To
validate our model, we conducted a series of experiments on seven open-source software projects with over
6,000 bug reports. Compared with the traditional model (i.e., Locus), Kept performs better by 33.2% to 59.5%
in terms of mean reciprocal rank, mean average precision, and Top@N. Compared with the best-performing
non-commercial LLM (i.e., CodeT5), Kept achieves an improvement of 36.6% to 63.7%. Compared to the
state-of-the-art commercial LLM developed by OpenAI, called text-embedding-ada-002, Kept achieves an
average improvement of 7.8% to 17.4%. The results indicate that introducing knowledge graphs contributes to
enhance the effectiveness of the LLM in bug localization.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software testing and debugging.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: large language model, knowledge enhancement, bug localization, informa-
tion retrieval
∗ He Zhang is the corresponding author. Lanxin Yang is also the corresponding author.


Authors’ Contact Information: Yue Li, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, yue.li@smail.nju.edu.cn; Bohan Liu, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China, bohanliu@nju.edu.cn; Ting Zhang, Singapore Management University, Singapore, Singapore,
tingzhang.2019@phdcs.smu.edu.sg; Zhiqi Wang, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, 502022320013@smail.nju.edu.cn;
David Lo, Singapore Management University, Singapore, Singapore, davidlo@smu.edu.sg; Lanxin Yang, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China, lxyang@nju.edu.cn; Jun Lyu, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, lvjun_dnt@outlook.com; He Zhang,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, hezhang@nju.edu.cn.




This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM 2994-970X/2025/7-ARTFSE086
https://doi.org/10.1145/3729356


                                     Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:2                     Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang


ACM Reference Format:
Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang. 2025. A Knowledge
Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 2, FSE, Article FSE086 (July 2025),
23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3729356


1   Introduction
As software systems are developed and evolve, a large number of bug reports are generated, making
bug localization critical and labor-intensive [8, 16, 44]. Effective bug localization enhances software
maintenance efficiency and ensures software product quality. Bug localization is a time-consuming
task that requires understanding bug reports and locating the source code that needs to be fixed.
A recent study shows that 32% of time and cost is spent on bug localization during the software
development life cycle [42]. Bug localization remains a challenging task due to the significant gap
between the natural language used to describe bugs in bug reports and the programming language
used to develop software products in source code [57]. Further research is required to improve the
effectiveness and accuracy of bug localization techniques.
   In the literature, there are quite a few studies that propose automatic linkage of bug reports in bug
tracking systems with buggy code in version control systems [19, 28, 31, 55]. Information retrieval
(IR) techniques are proposed and explored to be effective in bug localization, demonstrating the
potential to improve software developers’ productivity [4]. These techniques take historical bug
reports and source code as inputs and output a ranked list of source code that may cause the
bugs. Several researchers have calculated the semantic similarity of bug reports and source code
by extracting semantic features between them. In recent years, LLMs have gained considerable
attention from researchers in bug localization since it has achieved performance breakthroughs in
various natural language processing tasks (e.g., IR) [12].
   LLMs have demonstrated boosted performance in various areas, prompting researchers to use
them in bug localization [46]. LLMs can effectively capture knowledge from large amounts of data
because of their sophisticated pre-training objectives and massive model parameters [12]. The rich
knowledge implicitly encoded in massive parameters can benefit a variety of downstream tasks
when stored in many parameters and fine-tuned for specific tasks, as demonstrated in extensive
experimental verifications and empirical analyses [46].
   LLMs are used for a variety of purposes, including bug localization since they possess powerful
capabilities for capturing knowledge. Ciborowska and Damevski [4] applied BERT to rapidly locate
bugs based on changesets by encoding changesets in different ways. The evaluation results reveal
the advantages of using the proposed BERT model in comparison with the baselines for bug
localization. Discriminative LLMs, such as BERT, serve as a kind of auto-denoising encoder for
automatically corrupted texts [56]. Agnieszka and andKostadin explore several design decisions
related to using BERT for changeset-based bug localization [4]. The evaluation results demonstrate
that the proposed BERT model has advantages over the baselines, especially for bug reports that do
not contain any hints regarding related code elements. Du and Yu represent source code through
semantic flow graphs, and evaluation results indicate that their method achieves state-of-the-art
bug localization performance [5].
   Although these LLMs have shown promising results in bug localization, they suffer from the
following two weaknesses.
   First, these models have difficulty in capturing the context information of bug reports and source
code. The descriptions of bug reports and the contents of changesets are usually brief and cannot
provide sufficient background information. As a result, the model is unable to fully comprehend
the content of the bug report and the content of the source code.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                               FSE086:3


    Second, these models fail to understand the domain-specific expertise of particular projects. As
domain-specific text, bug reports contain large amounts of domain-specific knowledge that rarely
appears in natural language corpora, making it difficult for LLMs to understand their accurate
meaning. Furthermore, source code is a highly structured and formalized language that encapsulates
a wide range of project-specific knowledge. For example, the version information is included in
bug reports, and the class names are defined in the code.
    To alleviate these problems, we propose Kept, an LLM that leverages domain knowledge of
project documents and source code, which introduces domain knowledge to enhance an LLM. By
leveraging terminology and natural language descriptions in documents and the historical source
code of the project, which can be readily accessed from public repositories, Kept empowers LLMs
to memorize and reason about bug reports and source code. In addition, it is consistent with the
process of bug localization performed by experts, who also need to consult project documents and
source code when they encounter unfamiliar bug reports.
    In this paper, we design novel model structures to effectively use domain knowledge to improve
the LLMs’ memorization and reasoning abilities for bug reports and source code. First, we construct
a text knowledge graph based on the historical documents and a code knowledge graph based on
the source code. Then, we integrate the extracted knowledge graphs into the LLM to enhance its
reasoning abilities for expertise in bug reports and source code. Incorporating too much knowledge
could lead to a deviation from the intended meaning of the sentence. To overcome these challenges,
we use soft-position embedding to reconstruct the position of the token and visible matrix to limit
the visible range of each token.
    To evaluate the effectiveness of Kept, we compare its results with five state-of-the-art models
(i.e., Locus [47], GPT-2 [32], GraphCodeBERT [11], CodeT5 [46], and text-embedding-ada-002).
Locus is the first model to use changesets to locate bugs. GPT-2 and CodeT5 have been widely
recognized as leading LLMs because of their robust capabilities. GraphCodeBERT is an advanced
LLM that uses graphs to illustrate the inherent structure of code. text-embedding-ada-002 is an
efficient text embedding model developed by OpenAI, capable of generating high-quality vector
representations [20]. We conduct a series of evaluations of seven open source software (OSS) with
over 6,000 bug reports to validate our model. As measured across OSS projects, Kept outperforms
Locus by 33.2% to 59.5% on average, and outperforms CodeT5, the best-performing LLM, by 36.6%
to 63.7% on various evaluation metrics (i.e., mean reciprocal rank, mean average precision, and
Top@N). The experimental results show that Kept outperforms all five state-of-the-art models in
bug localization. In addition, the results indicate that our approach can improve the effectiveness
of three LLMs for bug localization.
    The main contributions of this study can be concluded as follows:
      • A knowledge enhanced pre-trained approach: To the best of our knowledge, this study
        is the first attempt to enhance the LLM by introducing domain knowledge in bug localization,
        which has the potential to improve LLMs’ memorization and reasoning abilities for bug
        reports and source code.
      • A novel model: We present a model for representing knowledge graphs using soft-position
        embedding and visible matrices to effectively inject domain knowledge without introducing
        knowledge noise into the model.
      • An extensive evaluation: We evaluate the effectiveness of the knowledge-enhanced LLM
        on over 6,000 bug reports in seven OSS projects. The experimental results indicate that our
        knowledge-enhanced LLM outperforms the state-of-the-art models. In particular, LLMs with
        knowledge enhancement perform significantly better than those without.



                                  Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:4                     Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang


2     Background and Motivation
2.1    IR-based Bug Localization
IR technologies play an important role in bug localization, which involves matching bug reports
with source code. LLMs have exhibited outstanding performance in various IR tasks, including
bug localization [27]. To illustrate the process, we describe the steps involved in using an LLM for
bug localization. The architecture of an LLM typically consists of multiple Transformer encoders,
which are designed to model sequence data using a self-attention mechanism [6]. The concept of
attention is to assign different weights to specific words in the sequence, i.e., to encode a stronger
relationship between each word in the sequence and its semantically related word. The process
of using an LLM for bug localization involves three main steps: first, the model is pre-trained on
a large corpus of Software Engineering (SE) data, then it is fine-tuned for bug localization, and
finally, suspicious code files are retrieved for a new bug report.

2.2    Existing Methods with LLM
2.2.1 LLM For Bug Localization. During pre-training, an LLM uses a large corpus of relevant text
to construct a domain-specific language model, such as an SE language model trained on Stack
Overflow data [39]. Since the pre-training step requires a large amount of data and resources, many
researchers opt to fine-tune LLMs for downstream tasks rather than training models from scratch.
    The fine-tuning is designed to train an LLM on a small dataset to apply it to specific tasks, such
as bug localization. Typically, the LLM is fine-tuned by adding additional layers, which incorporate
the output of an LLM as inputs. Since the goal of this study is to locate the bug-inducing code files,
it is necessary to select a task-specific dataset that includes bug reports and buggy code files.
2.2.2 Knowledge Enhancement LLMs. Despite the advantages that LLMs possess, such as efficiently
learning rich knowledge from large training texts and utilizing downstream tasks during their fine-
tuning phase, they still have some limitations, such as poor inference abilities due to deficiencies in
external knowledge.
   LLMs have been widely applied to many fields in recent years due to their boosted performance.
Although LLMs have the advantage of efficiently learning rich knowledge from large training texts
and benefiting downstream tasks during their fine-tuning stages, they still possess some limitations,
such as poor inference abilities due to a lack of external knowledge. To address these issues, research
has been dedicated to integrating knowledge graphs into LLMs. Generally, knowledge-enhanced
approaches are divided into the following two categories [13]: By integrating knowledge graphs
through pre-trained tasks, LLMs can learn representations related to knowledge graphs during the
pre-trained phase.
   Through pre-trained tasks. These approaches design a joint pre-trained task that integrates entity
embedding with text embedding. This task combines knowledge graph embedding tasks with
training tasks using masked language modeling (MLM). While injecting knowledge graphs into
LLMs through pre-trained tasks is feasible, this integration approach is inefficient and expensive [38].
On the one hand, introducing knowledge graphs through pre-trained tasks increases the additional
training workload. On the other hand, the model is unable to adapt to changes in the knowledge
graph, increasing the training cost when the knowledge graph changes [13].
   Changing the attention mechanisms. To integrate corresponding knowledge into LLMs, several
approaches attempt to modify the attention mechanism within the Transformer architecture.
For example, KEAR [51] splices knowledge graph entity-related triples, entity descriptions, and
additional questions as external knowledge with the original input, and then applies a self-attention
mechanism to the spliced input. This category of approaches can integrate knowledge graphs
without changing the model structure, and it is suitable for most LLMs using the Transformer

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                                                               FSE086:5

   Criteria           is-a
                                         Bug Report: TEIID-1498                              Criteria       is-a                Text Sentence Tree
  compareCrit                condition
                                         The rewrite of a condition such as "not((a or       The rewrite of a condition such as "not((a or b) AND c)"
                               is-a      b) AND c)" with a,b,c predicates where c a          with a,b,c predicates where c a is predicate that is
 regexMatchCrit                                                                              negatable, such as ...
                                         is predicate that is negatable, such as ...
                                                                                             compareCrit           is-a
       is-a              predicate
      Text Knowledge Graph                                                                     TestQueryRewriter          has   Code Sentence Tree
                                                 Knowledge Injection                         private Criteria helpTestRewriteCriteria(String original,
                             has                                                             Criteria
TestQueryRewriter
                                                                                             expectedCrit, QueryMetadataInterface metadata) {
                                          Code Changeset: engine/src/test/java/org/                Criteria origCrit = parseCriteria(original,
                                          teiid/query/rewriter/TestQueryRewriter.java        metadata) ...
              helpTestRewriteCriteria     private Criteria
        has                               helpTestRewriteCriteria(String                      TestQueryRewriter           has
                                          original, Criteria expectedCrit,
               parseCriteria              QueryMetadataInterface metadata) {
                                               Criteria origCrit = parseCriteria(original,    Sentence tree      Inserted text      Inserted code
      Code Knowledge Graph                metadata) ...                                          trunk         knowledge graph     knowledge graph


                                            Fig. 1. An example of knowledge injection

encoder architecture. In addition, the models can adapt well to changes in the knowledge graph
without retraining [13]. Since approach changing attention mechanisms can adapt to changes in
knowledge graphs and introduce them at a lower cost than others, we also use the approach to
integrating knowledge graphs into LLMs.
   Bug localization is of paramount importance to software maintenance, and it has achieved
promising advancements. However, bug localization remains an open question, given the limitation
caused by the significant difference between the natural language describing bugs and the source
code implementing software. Existing bug localization methods using LLMs often lack external
knowledge, limiting their effectiveness.
   Motivated by the aforementioned challenges, we propose a knowledge-enhanced approach. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates a real example in the JIRA system. A bug report1 includes the following description:
“The rewrite of a condition such as "not((a or b) AND c)" with a,b,c predicates where c is a
predicate that is negatable, such as col1 = 1. The result should have the negated form of col1 <>
1, but instead has col1 = 1. This is because the col1 = 1 predicate is repeated in the result, but not
cloned and the rewriter modifies the same instance”. The provided description alone is insufficient
for precise bug localization due to its generic nature and lack of specific code references.

2.3     Motivation
Our approach addresses these challenges by (1) extracting a textual knowledge graph from the
historical project documentation, (2) creating a code knowledge graph from its historical source
code, and (3) integrating these knowledge graphs into the sentence trees of a bug report and code
changesets. Fig. 1 illustrates the extracted textual and code knowledge graphs on the left side.
   We integrate external knowledge using knowledge graphs: (1) the entries in knowledge graphs are
matched with the entities in bug reports and suspicious code; (2) the matched entries in knowledge
graphs are added to the bug reports and suspicious code to effectively inject domain knowledge. As
shown in Figure 1, incorporating Criteria is-a condition in the text sentence tree enables the
bug report to be matched with buggy code. In addition, the model can benefit from integrating other
knowledge graphs, such as TestQueryRewriter has parseCriteria, to facilitate understanding
of relationships between entities. Obviously, without contextual information on the bug report and
suspicious code, it is difficult for the model to understand them. A number of researchers have
argued that bug reports and source code are difficult to understand without contextual information
in the literature [59].
1 https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TEIID-1498



                                              Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:6                           Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang


       3. Bug Localization
                                                        Not Relevant                                         Relevant
                                                                                  Classification layer

                                      Pre-training                      Fine-tuning              Contrastive Learning            Bug-free code
                                                                                                  Bug Report
                                                                                                                    max
                                                                                                               min
                                                           Data                                                           Buggy code
                                          Domain Data             Downstream Data


 2. Constructing Knowledge
Enhanced Pre-trained Model                                                  Mask-Transformer Encoder
                                                                           Attn(Q,K,V)=Softmax(A+M)V
                                   Embedding Layer                     Seeing Layer           Embedding Layer                 Seeing Layer


                                   Sentence Tree     The          of     a Condition       Sentence Tree for private Criteria  …     }
                                  for Bug Report           rewrite     instance …            Source Code helpTestRewriteCriteria request


                                             Knowledge Injection Layer                                   Knowledge Injection Layer

                                    Text                                                      Code
                                 Knowledge                           Bug Report             Knowledge                     Code Changesets
    1. Constructing Knowledge
                                   Graph                                                      Graph
              Graph

                                Open Relation Extraction             Project Document        Abstract Syntax Tree            Code Repository


                                          Fig. 2. An overview of the proposed approach

   By enhancing LLMs with this external knowledge, we aim to improve the accuracy and effec-
tiveness of bug localization, addressing the limitations of existing methods and bridging the gap
between natural language bug descriptions and source code.

3      Approach
3.1       Definitions of Knowledge Graph
This study aims to construct a knowledge-enhanced LLM that leverages domain knowledge to
enhance LLM for bug localization. This subsection provides a formal definition of related concepts
to assist readers in understanding the scope of this project.
   Definition 1: Knowledge graph. A knowledge graph is defined as a system in which all entities
(e.g., things, places) are stored in the form of connected graphs [17].
   Definition 2: Text knowledge graph. We denote a sentence 𝑠 ={𝑤 0, 𝑤 1, 𝑤 2, ..., 𝑤𝑛 } as a sequence
of tokens, where 𝑛 is the length of this sentence. The tokens of the sentence are taken at the word
level. Each token 𝑤𝑖 is included in the vocabulary 𝑉 , 𝑤𝑖 𝜖𝑉 . Text knowledge graph, denoted as 𝑇 𝐾𝐺,
is a collection of triples 𝜀 = (𝑤𝑖 , 𝑤𝑟 𝑗 , 𝑤𝑘 ), where 𝑤𝑖 and 𝑤𝑘 are the names of entities, and 𝑤𝑟 𝑗 𝜖𝑉 is
the relation between them.
   Definition 3: Code knowledge graph. We denote a code snippet 𝑐 ={𝑐 0, 𝑐 1, 𝑐 2, ..., 𝑐𝑛 } as a sequence
of tokens, where 𝑛 is the length of this code snippet. The tokens of the sentence are taken at the
character level. We construct an abstract syntax tree (AST) from the source code file using JavaParser.
The nodes in AST constitute nodes in the code knowledge graph. Code knowledge graph, denoted
as 𝐶𝐾𝐺, represents a set of triples 𝜁 = (𝑐𝑖 , 𝑐𝑟 𝑗 , 𝑐𝑘 ), in which 𝑐𝑖 and 𝑐𝑘 represent the names of entities,
and 𝑐𝑟 𝑗 𝜖𝐴𝑆𝑇 is the relation between them.

3.2       Overview
In Figure 2, we provide an overview of Kept that aims to improve the accuracy of bug localization
by incorporating domain-specific information into an LLM. The project documents and the source

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                                   FSE086:7


code of the project serve as input domain knowledge, while the history of bug reports and buggy
code serve as input historical knowledge. The approach consists of three steps.
    First, we construct knowledge graphs (Section 3.3). To construct a text knowledge graph, we
use Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) [24] to filter noise and use the open relationship extraction
technology MinIE [7] to extract entities and relationships in project documents. NLTK and MinIE
provide higher precision and recall in extracting knowledge graphs from real-world projects than
most other tools [7, 24]. To construct a code knowledge graph, we extract the AST structure of the
project source code using JavaParser2 , and traverse the AST to obtain entities and relationships in
the source code.
    Second, we construct the knowledge-enhanced LLM (Section 3.4). The step consists of four parts:
(1) Model embedding: This part involves generating vector representations of text and code through
model embedding. There are three layers involved in this process e.g., the knowledge injection
layer, the knowledge embedding layer, and the seeing layer. (2) Mask Transformer: The input
embeddings and visible matrix are fed into a mask self-attention, which differs from the traditional
Transformer encoder. (3) Pre-training model: The UniXcoder model is pre-trained using SE corpora
(i.e., CodeSearchNet) to adapt to language features and terminologies because of UniXcoder’s
superior performance in code understanding. (4) Fine-tuning model: The model is fine-tuned using
historical data on bug localization.
    Finally, we use the LLM to locate bugs. We input the semantic features learned by the LLM into
the fully connected layer for bug localization.

3.3   Constructing Knowledge Graphs
We construct two types of knowledge graphs in this study: (1) a text knowledge graph and (2) a
code knowledge graph.
3.3.1 Constructing Text Knowledge Graphs. We construct a text knowledge graph to effectively
capture domain knowledge from project documents. First, we use the NLTK module for part-
of-speech tagging to filter out noise and segment the content of project documents into lists of
sentences. Second, we use the open relation extraction method MinIE [7] to extract entities and
relationships from the project. MinIE extracts knowledge graphs efficiently from a variety of
domains, demonstrating robust adaptability across varied corpora. In addition, MinIE constructs
a minimized dictionary to filter and remove redundant data from the triples. MinIE is unable to
extract triples directly from web pages, so preprocessing is necessary before extracting the triples.
The preprocessing consists of three steps: (1) Text extraction: We use Python’s BeautifulSoup
library to extract textual elements from the documents, which is a widely used library for parsing
HTML and XML, and constructs a structured parse tree to efficiently extract HTML elements; (2)
Noise reduction: To minimize noise, we use regular expressions to remove unnecessary whitespace,
non-linguistic elements (e.g., URLs and email addresses), and special characters. (3) Sentence
segmentation: The document is segmented into sentences by using the NLTK library, a widely
used natural language processing tool that accurately segments sentences across a variety of
languages and formats. After preprocessing, MinIE’s recognizer extracts triples from the sentences.
The extracted triples are then refined using MinIE’s minimization dictionary, which filters out
redundant information from the triples.
3.3.2 Constructing Code Knowledge Graphs. By using JavaParser, we can obtain the AST of the
source code, and then traverse the AST to obtain a collection of triplets that are entities of the
knowledge graph. Following this, we extract the relations possessed by the head and tail entities
2 https://github.com/javaparser/javaparser



                                      Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:8                           Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang

  1       2      3        4       7                     10           11        12         13          0 1 2 3 4 5 67         8 9 101112131415
The    rewrite   of       a   condition       …     rewriter        modifies   the     same      0
  1       2      3        4       5                      6            7         8          9     1
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                 3                                               Visible
                      6                                                                    16                          ...
                                                                                                 4
                        is-a                                  9                       instance   5
                      4                                   has                                    6
                             condition                        5                            10    7
                                                                                 15




                                                                                                            ...




                                                                                                                                    ...
                       5                   8                                   is-a               8
                        Criteria          queryRewriter                14         9               9
                       3                                                                         10
                                           4                      regexMatchCrit                 11                    ...                      Invisible
                                                                                                 12
 Gray: Hard position index                                              8                        13
                                                                                                 14
 Red : Soft position index                                                                       15



                       Fig. 3. The process of converting a sentence tree into a visible matrix


of the triples. We traverse the AST to obtain all triples of the relevant source code to build a code
knowledge graph.

3.4    Constructing Knowledge Enhanced LLM
3.4.1 Model Embedding. Model embedding consists of three main components: the knowledge
injection layer, the embedding layer, and the seeing layer. Kept uses the knowledge injection layer
to retrieve triples corresponding to input bug reports or buggy code (referred to as input sequences).
Then, the triples are injected into the input sequence to generate a sentence tree infused with
knowledge. Finally, the sentence tree is fed into both the knowledge injection layer and the seeing
layer, where it is transformed into input embeddings and visible matrixes. Through this structure,
the model can determine the visible range of each token in the self-attention mechanism, thus
enabling it to acquire external knowledge without losing its original meaning.
    The sentence tree is constructed as follows: (1) we segmented bug reports using UniXcoder’s
word splitter and code using Pygments3 , forming the original sentence tree; (2) we matched entities
in the original sentence tree with those in the constructed knowledge graph; (3) we enriched the
sentence tree by incorporating matched triples from the knowledge graph, producing the final
sentence tree.
Knowledge Injection Layer. The knowledge injection layer is used to query the triples contained
in the original input based on specific rules, and then integrate the original input with the triplet
knowledge to form a sentence tree. Specifically, we use Pygments for code disambiguation and
UniXcoder for bug report disambiguation and then traverse the segmented words to generate the
corresponding sentence tree nodes. Afterward, the algorithm then iterates over the segmented
words and generates a sentence tree node for each word. In the next step, the algorithm determines
if the word has a corresponding entity in the knowledge graph, and if so, adds a ternary relationship
between the node and the entity. Finally, the algorithm adds the processed sentence tree node to
the sentence tree.
    Given an input sentence (𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 𝑤 0, 𝑤 1, 𝑤 2, ..., 𝑤𝑛 ) and a knowledge graph 𝐾, the knowledge
injection layer outputs a sentence tree (𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒 = 𝑤 0, 𝑤 1, ..., 𝑤𝑖 ((𝑟𝑖0, 𝑤𝑖0 ), ..., (𝑟𝑖𝑘 , 𝑤𝑖𝑘 )), ..., 𝑤𝑛 ), where
𝑤𝑖 represents a word or entity in the input sentence, and𝑇 = (𝑤𝑖 , 𝑟𝑖0, 𝑤𝑖0 ), ..., (𝑤𝑖 , 𝑟𝑖𝑘 , 𝑤𝑖𝑘 ) represents
the set of triples associated with the word 𝑤𝑖 , where 𝑤𝑖 , 𝑟𝑖𝑘 , and 𝑤𝑖𝑘 are the head entities, relation,
and tail entities of the triple, respectively.
Embedding Layer. The embedding layer converts the sentence tree into corresponding embedding
representations that can be fed into the mask Transformer. Similar to the Transformer architecture,
the input embedding of Kept is composed of token embedding and position embedding, with the
difference being the use of a soft-position embedding. The structure facilitates the transformation
3 https://pygments.org/



Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                               FSE086:9


of the sentence tree into token embedding and positional embedding for the mask Transformer to
retain its structural features.
   Soft-position embedding ensures the correct order of a sentence tree. As shown in Figure 3,
introducing triples from the knowledge graph can disrupt the original structure of the sentence tree.
For example, the sentence “The rewrite of a condition” was reordered to “The rewrite of
a Criteria” due to the triple (condition, is-a, Criteria) introduced from the knowledge
graph. Soft-position embedding resolves such disruptions, maintaining the correct order in the
sentence tree.
Seeing Layer. Although soft-position embedding ensures the sequential correctness of input
sequences with their triples, tokens with identical position indices may cause improper correlation
in the self-attention mechanism. In addition, expanding the sentence tree introduces newly inserted
triples that affect all tokens, changing the original meaning of the input sequence. For instance, in
the Figure 3, Criteria is used to decorate condition, which is unrelated to rewrite. Accordingly,
rewrite should not be influenced by Criteria.
   To address this problem, we introduce the seeing layer, a visibility matrix, which reduces the
impact of irrelevant information on model learning. The visible matrix is a technique used to control
the exposure or visibility of different tokens during the learning or prediction process. It serves as
a mechanism to ensure that the model does not inject excessive or irrelevant knowledge that could
distort the meaning of the original sentence or context.
   The visible matrix 𝑀 is defined as shown in Equation 1.

                                                
                                                    0  𝑡𝑖 ⊕ 𝑡 𝑗
                                       𝑀𝑖 𝑗 =                                                                     (1)
                                                    −∞ otherwise

   The visible matrix comprises elements of 0 and −∞, where 𝑡𝑖 and 𝑡 𝑗 represent token elements in
the token embedding after the sentence tree is transformed, and 𝑖 and 𝑗 are their respective indices
in the token embedding. 𝑡𝑖 ⊕ 𝑡 𝑗 indicates that 𝑡𝑖 and 𝑡 𝑗 are either in the original input sequence or
belong to the same relation branch of the sentence tree, meaning they are members of the same
triple. Figure 3 illustrates the structure of the visible matrix in detail, as gray numbers represent
the true positions of tokens in the token embedding. The blue nodes indicate that the two tokens
are visible in the visible matrix, and their value is 0, while the white nodes indicate that the two
tokens are invisible, and their value is −∞.

3.4.2 Mask Transformer. The traditional Transformer architecture cannot use a visible matrix as
input, nor can it selectively limit the attention range of each input token. To address this limitation,
we propose a mask self-attention mechanism called mask Transformer. The mask Transformer
comprises N mask self-attention layers stacked on top of each other. We use a multi-head mask
attention layer based on the mask self-attention mechanism to compute the attention mechanism.
The formula for the mask self-attention mechanism is shown in Equation 2.
   In the equation, 𝐻𝑖 represents the hidden state of each layer. When 𝑖 = 0, 𝐻 0 is the input
embedding of the model. 𝑊𝑞 , 𝑊𝑘 , and 𝑊𝑣 are learnable parameters of the model, and 𝑀 is the
visible matrix. The equation calculates the query vector 𝑄𝑖 , key vector 𝐾𝑖 , and value vector 𝑉𝑖
corresponding to the input 𝐻𝑖 . Then, it calculates the attention score 𝐴𝑖 using the query vector
𝑄𝑖 and key vector 𝐾𝑖 , where 𝑑𝑘 represents the dimension of the hidden vector of the model. After
that, the attention score 𝐴𝑖 is added to the visible matrix 𝑀, and the SoftMax function is applied
to obtain the attention distribution 𝑆𝑖 . Finally, the attention mechanism output is calculated by
multiplying the attention distribution 𝑆𝑖 with the value vector 𝑉𝑖 .

                                  Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:10                    Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang



                                                   𝑄 𝑖 = 𝐻 𝑖 × 𝑊𝑞
                                                   𝐾 𝑖 = 𝐻 𝑖 × 𝑊𝑘
                                                   𝑉 𝑖 = 𝐻 𝑖 × 𝑊𝑣
                                                       𝑄 𝑖 𝐾 𝑖⊤
                                                   𝐴𝑖 = √
                                                           𝑑𝑘                                                    (2)
                                                                  𝑒𝑥
                                          𝑆𝑜 𝑓 𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 (𝑥) = Í𝑛             𝑥𝑗
                                                                 𝑗=1 𝑒
                                                                              
                                                   𝑆 𝑖 = SoftMax 𝐴𝑖 + 𝑀
                                                𝐻 𝑖+1 = 𝑆 𝑖 × 𝑉 𝑖
    In the self-attention mechanism, 𝐴𝑖 𝑗 represents a matrix where 𝐴𝑖 ∈ 𝐴𝑖 signifies the attention
score between the 𝑗th and 𝑘th tokens in the input embedding. When tokens 𝑖 and 𝑗 are not visible,
𝑀 𝑗𝑘 = −∞, thus 𝑀 𝑗𝑘 +𝐴𝑖 𝑗 = −∞. Consequently, SoftMax(𝐴𝑖 𝑗 +𝑀 𝑗𝑘 ) = 0, ensuring that the attention
distribution 𝑆𝑖 does not allow token 𝑗 to influence the hidden state of token 𝑖, thereby restricting
attention between different tokens. Under the masked self-attention mechanism, newly introduced
triple information does not directly affect the hidden state of the [CLS] token but serves as a
bridge through the original input sequence’s triple head entity. As illustrated in Figure 3, is-a
is a token in the knowledge triple, and it is invisible to condition implies no impact of ℎ𝑖 −1 on
ℎ𝑖 . However, has and the head entity rewriter in the triple is visible, allowing ℎ𝑖 −1 to influence
ℎ𝑖 . Similarly, is-a is visible to instance, enabling ℎ𝑖+1 to indirectly acquire information from
ℎ𝑖 −1 . This approach maximizes the utilization of triple information to enhance the representation
of entities in the original input sequence, introducing knowledge information to improve the
representation capability of the original input.
3.4.3 Pre-training Model. We use the UniXcoder [10] due to its superior performance on various
code understanding and generation tasks to learn the word distribution between bug reports
and buggy codes. UniXcoder demonstrates adaptability to various tasks. Its performance in code
understanding tasks, such as code search, is superior to other LLMs such as GPT-2 [10]. The model
uses mask attention matrixes with prefix adapters to control its behavior and leverages cross-modal
content, including AST and code annotations, to enhance its code representation.
   We conduct pre-training of Kept using a large code search corpus to improve its reasoning
ability for the relationship between textual data and code snippets. This task involves matching
code with text, aligned with the bug localization objective to increase the accuracy of matching
bug reports with code snippets. CodeSearchNet serves as the training data set for code search
training, which uses the same model architecture as bug localization training. The data set consists
of millions of code snippets and text on GitHub, with the Java language part containing 503,502
text-code pairs.
3.4.4 Fine-tuning Model. After pre-training, we fine-tune Kept to ensure it is effective at im-
plementing downstream tasks and to maximize the utilization of the knowledge graph. During
the fine-tuning process, we employ the ⟨𝑅, 𝐶, 𝐿⟩ as input of Kept, where 𝑅 represents the bug
report, 𝐶 represents the buggy code related or unrelated to the bug report, and 𝐿 is the label of
the relationship between them. Contrastive learning is used to reduce the distance between bug
reports and buggy changesets and to increase the distance between bug reports and non-buggy
changesets. If 𝑅 is related to 𝐶, then 𝐿 = 1; otherwise, 𝐿 = 0. In contrastive learning, the online
negative sampling method proposed by Lin et al. [23] is used to select negative samples.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                                  FSE086:11


3.5    Bug Localization
We use historical bug reports and code files (i.e., data in the training set) to train our models for
new bug reports. The learned semantic features are input into a fully connected layer for bug
localization. As the model is trained iteratively, the loss function is monitored and the weights of
semantic features are optimized over several epochs.
   After receiving a new bug report, Kept processes the new bug report and all historical change-
sets, creating separate hidden state matrices for them. The hidden state matrices are pooled and
concatenated to generate joint feature vectors for the new bug report and changesets. Then, the
joint feature vectors are fed into a classifier, which predicts a two-dimensional vector (𝑚, 𝑛), where
𝑚 represents the unrelated score, and 𝑛 represents the related score. Finally, suspicious changesets
related to the new bug report are localized based on the scores of the two-dimensional vector.

4     Experimental Evaluation
In this section, we present the research questions, the studied dataset, the baselines, and the
evaluation metrics. The dataset and the source code are available online4 .

4.1    Research Questions
We first compare our model with the state-of-the-art bug localization techniques in our experiments
to evaluate its effectiveness (RQ1). Afterward, we implement an ablation experiment to evaluate
the impact of introducing knowledge graphs on the LLM for bug localization (RQ2). Finally, we
conduct another ablation experiment to evaluate the impact of soft-position embedding and visible
matrices on three LLMs (RQ3).
    • RQ1: How effective is Kept compared to the state-of-the-art models for bug localization?
    • RQ2: How do knowledge graphs impact the effectiveness of Kept?
    • RQ3: How do soft-position embedding and visible matrices impact the accuracy of LLMs in
      bug localization?
4.1.1 RQ1: Effectiveness of Kept. In recent years, graph-related techniques have been used to
incorporate structural information contained in code into LLMs. These LLMs based on code
structure graphs have demonstrated reasonable performance improvements in software engineering.
However, previous research on LLMs often overlooks the interrelated information within the code
and fails to integrate domain knowledge to address the bug localization problem. In this paper, we
propose an approach to locating bugs that leverages a knowledge-enhanced LLM to incorporate
domain knowledge and interrelated code information. To validate our proposed model, we compare
it to five advanced and representative baseline models.
Experimental Settings: The five collected baselines are Locus [47], GPT-2 [32], GraphCode-
BERT [11], CodeT5 [46], and text-embedding-ada-002. Locus is a traditional IR-based method for
locating bugs based on changesets [47]. GPT-2, GraphCodeBERT, and CodeT5 are advanced LLMs.
We use the Locus implemented by Bench4BL [19] to conduct experiments. text-embedding-ada-002
represents the state-of-the-art commercial text embedding model [20]. To ensure fairness in our
experiment, we used the open-source models and parameters reported in their papers for GPT-2,
CodeT5, GraphCodeBERT, and text-embedding-ada-002. In addition, we performed the fine-tuning
of the baseline for all large language models to ensure fairness. To implement our Kept model,
we mainly use two Python libraries, i.e., Transformers [48] and PyTorch [30]. Since the impact of
time on the training and testing set, we adopted the strategy proposed by Lin et al. [23] to build
the training and testing datasets. We used 50% of bug reports and buggy code in projects as the
4 The source dataset and source code for this study are available online at https://github.com/keptmodel/KEPT



                                     Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:12                        Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang

                                           Table 1. Details of the OSS projects

 Project      Time Span          #Bug Report #Code Files          #Changesets       Code knowledge graph Text knowledge graph
                                                           Commits Files      Hunks Relation    Entity    Relation   Entity
  Teiid 2004-04-27~2017-04-03       1297         2291       1637     8843     21295   96985     212882     1748        8208
 Hornetq 2006-05-17~2015-03-31       270         1618        327     1439     3826    63253     137068      500        1794
 Seam2 2005-09-11~2014-03-16         776         1510        881     2172     4222    17076      35473      719        3149
  Weld 2009-02-07~2017-03-24         560         2515        704     3668     6101    21910      40701      353        1171
 Drools 2006-03-10~2017-03-30       1281         2231       1649     8091     24526   73081     155280     1021        3993
 Derby 2004-09-28~2016-11-27        1778         2408       2590    11435     26485  111960     243542      964        3764
 Log4j2 2011-09-16~2017-03-12        441          920        735     3516     6886    18853      37527      475        1523
  Total            -                6403        13493        8523   39164     93341  403118     862473     5780       23602



training set and the other 50% as the testing set. To prevent data leakage, we only used project
documents and code available up to the end of the training set as data sources for constructing
the knowledge graph. To address the RQs posed in this paper, experiments were conducted on a
server equipped with two NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPUs. To construct the LLMs, two Python
libraries were primarily utilized: Transformers V4.36.2 and PyTorch V1.11.0. During training, the
PyTorch library provides computational support for Transformer-based model architectures, while
the Transformers library provides an API for accessing Transformer-based model architectures.
Regarding the configuration parameters of the model, the number of layers in the masked self-
attention layer and the number of heads in the multi-head attention mechanism were denoted as L
and A, respectively. Furthermore, the hidden dimension of the embedding vectors was represented
by H. The parameters of the model were configured as follows: L = 12, A = 12, H = 768.
4.1.2 RQ2: Effectiveness of Knowledge Graph. In this study, we use project documents to construct
the text knowledge graph. The knowledge graph contains domain-specific information about
the projects, which has the potential to enhance the LLM’s memorization and reasoning abilities
for bug reports. In addition, we use project source code to build the code knowledge graph. The
code knowledge graph represents the interrelated information of the code, offering potential
enhancements to LLMs’ memorization and reasoning abilities for source code. We conduct an
ablation experiment to study the effectiveness of knowledge graphs on the model performance.
Experimental Settings: To answer RQ2, we establish four scenarios: no knowledge graphs, only
text knowledge graphs, only code knowledge graphs, and both text and code knowledge graphs.
Similar to RQ1, we use the first 50% of bug reports and buggy code from projects as a training set,
while the remaining 50% served as a testing set.
4.1.3 RQ3: Effectiveness of Soft-Position Embedding and Visible Matrix. To effectively represent the
information extracted from knowledge graphs, we propose a structure using soft-position embed-
ding and visible matrix. We use the structure to convert the sentence tree into the token embedding
and position embedding of the mask encoder, while retaining the structural characteristics of the
sentence tree. To validate the impact of the proposed model structure on the models, we conduct an
ablation experiment to evaluate the effect of this model structure on three LLMs in bug localization.
Experimental Settings: To answer RQ3, we conduct an ablation experiment with three LLMs:
BERT, CodeBERT, and UniXcoder. All three models adopt an encoder structure. We evaluate the
impact of the proposed model structure on bug localization by incorporating the proposed structure
into these models and comparing them with the original LLMs. The experimental data and model
settings are consistent with those of RQ1.

4.2    Dataset
4.2.1 Datasets for bug localization. To address the RQs, we utilized the bug localization dataset
collected and validated by Rath et al [33]. We reuse seven of the 15 OSS projects from their dataset.
For the remaining eight projects, the source code repository or the project documents could not
be accessed. We exclude these eight projects from the dataset to ensure a fair comparison. The

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                                                           FSE086:13

                                 Table 2. The number of entities in the code knowledge graph
                                Entity                                                                Relation
 Project                                                        Contain Contain Contain                                        Return
           Class Interface Property Method Parameter Variable                             Inheritance Instantiation Invocation        Implementation
                                                                Member Variable Parameter                                       Type
 Teiid 5123 521            9434 26560       17369    37978      34919 37978       17369       1111       60337       35461 25076          631
Hornetq 3095 479           6418 16859       10615    25787      22844 25787       10615       1008       42352       17362 16409          691
Seam2 1571 142             1938 5998         4120     3307       7354   3307       4120       327        9311        5422   5397          235
 Weld 4089 371             2849 7208         4350     3043       9668   3043       4350       525        9867        5802   6748          698
Drools 4285 401           10914 18926       14260    24295      29321 24295       14260       1236       46965       19740 18194          1269
 Derby 3112 257           15786 27417       30307    35081      42821 35081       30307       1353       77548       28947 26802          683
Log4j2 1748 473            2637 5038         3486     5471       7125   5471       3486       334        10598       5948   4344          221
 Total 23023 2644         49976 108006      84507    134962     154052 134962     84507       5894      256978      118682 102970         4428


dataset includes both bug reports and the corresponding changesets submitted to resolve them.
We collect project documents such as version control documents from these projects to construct
the knowledge graph. We also collect commit logs and source code from all Git repositories of
the seven projects for constructing the code knowledge graph. As shown in Table 1, we provide
detailed information about the seven projects. A total of more than 6,000 bug reports are used to
evaluate the effectiveness of our model. To explore the granular impact of different changesets, we
further split the changesets into commit-level, file-level, and hunk-level code changes. As a result,
we evaluate changesets at three different levels of granularity: commits, files, and hunks.
4.2.2 Datasets for knowledge graphs. Based on the methods described in Section 3.3, this paper
constructs corresponding code knowledge graphs and text knowledge graphs for each project
in the bug localization dataset. To ensure fairness in the bug localization experiments and avoid
introducing future knowledge during the construction of the knowledge graphs, we select the code
repository and project documents before the bug report appears as the data source for constructing
the knowledge graph. Specifically, we select the creation time of the bug report at 50% (i.e., the
training set) as the reference time point for constructing knowledge graphs. Then we select the
software code repository and project documents of the projects that existed before the reference
time point as the original data for constructing knowledge graphs.
   For the construction of the code knowledge graph, the “Master” and “Main” branches from the
official code repositories were used as the primary data sources. The code files extracted for the
knowledge graph included the main systems, subsystems, and test cases for each project. The
resulting code knowledge graph encompasses 403,118 code entities and 862,473 code relationships.
The statistical details of the code knowledge graphs for different projects are provided in Table 2.
   To ensure the accuracy of the text knowledge graphs, project documents from the official websites
of each project are used. These documents included user manuals, developer guides, technical design
documents, and API references. The constructed text knowledge graph contains 5,780 knowledge
entities and 20,604 corresponding relationships. An overview of the text knowledge graphs for
different projects is shown in Table 1.

4.3        Baselines
To evaluate the performance of the proposed knowledge-enhanced LLM in bug localization, we
selected a traditional IR-based model, Locus, as the baseline. In addition, we included advanced
LLMs as the baselines, such as GPT-2, CodeT5, and GraphCodeBERT. Finally, we selected one of
the most advanced commercial models developed by OpenAI, called text-embedding-ada-002, as
another baseline.
   Locus [47]: Locus is a traditional text similarity-based bug localization approach. Based on the
VSM model, it locates suspicious code snippets at a more granular level of bug localization by using
similarity scores between bug reports and changesets.
   GPT-2 [32]: GPT-2 is a large-scale language model based on the Transformer architecture
developed by OpenAI. It uses self-attention mechanisms to capture long-range dependencies in text

                                                Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:14                    Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang


data. GPT-2 can be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks through fine-tuning. Based on the
vast WebText dataset of 8 million web pages totaling 40GB, GPT-2 shows remarkable performance.
Based on the vast WebText dataset of 8 million web pages totaling 40GB, GPT-2 shows remarkable
performance.
   GraphCodeBERT [11]: GraphCodeBERT is a natural language processing model that is specifi-
cally designed for a variety of code-related tasks. The technique builds on BERT and incorporates
structures to understand programming language. GraphCodeBERT can effectively handle the inter-
action between source code and natural language by combining the grammatical structure of the
code and natural language description. It leverages graph structures, constructing AST and data
flow graphs to capture information about code structure.
   CodeT5 [46]: CodeT5 is a pre-trained encoder-decoder Transformer model that leverages the
code semantics conveyed from developer-assigned identifiers. It is based on the T5 architecture
and has been pre-trained on data sets from a wide range of programming languages. CodeT5 uses
a novel identifier-aware pre-training target that is able to capture information about the code
structure and key tag types from the code. In this way, it comprehends programming language
semantics well and can be applied to various downstream tasks. We evaluated the effectiveness
of multiple baseline models, including both CodeT5 and CodeT5+, on our specific datasets. The
experimental results indicate that CodeT5 consistently outperforms CodeT5+ on all evaluation
metrics. Given these findings, we chose CodeT5 as the baseline instead of CodeT5+ to ensure that
our evaluation reflects the most effective model for bug localization.
   text-embedding-ada-002 [29]: text-embedding-ada-002 is an advanced neural embedding model
developed by OpenAI, designed for text representation and similarity tasks [54]. The model gener-
ates dense vector representations of textual inputs using a transformer-based architecture, enabling
efficient natural language processing (NLP). text-embedding-ada-002 exhibits state-of-the-art perfor-
mance across various embedding benchmarks, demonstrating robustness in tasks such as semantic
search, clustering, recommendation systems, and knowledge retrieval.

4.4    Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of the model, we use the following metrics that are widely used in
bug localization: i.e., 𝑀𝑅𝑅 (Mean Reciprocal Rank), 𝑀𝐴𝑃 (Mean Average Precision), and 𝑇𝑜𝑝@𝑁 .
   MRR (Mean Reciprocal Rank) measures a process that produces a list of possible responses to
a query. The reciprocal rank of a query response is equal to the multiplicative inverse of the rank
of the first correct answer. The mean reciprocal rank is the average of the reciprocal ranks of the
results for a sample of queries 𝑄:

                                                               |𝑄 |
                                                           1 ∑︁ 1
                                               𝑀𝑅𝑅 =                                                             (3)
                                                          |𝑄 | 𝑖=1 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖
  MAP (Mean Average Precision) measures a single-figure quality of IR when a query may
contain multiple relevant files. The AvgP (Average Precision of a single query) is calculated as the
average of the precision values obtained for a single query, as follows:

                                              𝑀
                                              ∑︁        𝑃 (𝑖) × pos(𝑖)
                                  Avg 𝑃𝑖 =                                                                       (4)
                                              𝑖=1
                                                  number of positive instances
  Where 𝑖 represents the rank, 𝑀 represents the number of instances retrieved, 𝑃 (𝑖) is defined as
the precision at the given cut-off rank 𝑖, and 𝑝𝑜𝑠 (𝑖) indicates the relevance of the instance.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                                                 FSE086:15

                              Table 3. Comparison of Kept with baselines for bug localization.
                                                  Commits                             Files                             Hunks
 Project        Technique
                                    MRR     MAP Top@1 Top@3 Top@5     MRR       MAP Top@1 Top@3 Top@5     MRR     MAP Top@1 Top@3 Top@5
                   Locus            0.394   0.371 0.300 0.439 0.515   0.389     0.226 0.297 0.433 0.505   0.387   0.197 0.296 0.431 0.501
                   GPT-2            0.277   0.257 0.183 0.297 0.364   0.267     0.157 0.183 0.286 0.353   0.261   0.133 0.181 0.279 0.336
              GraphCodeBERT         0.287   0.270 0.172 0.317 0.401   0.279     0.169 0.178 0.308 0.389   0.271   0.143 0.169 0.305 0.376
  Teiid           CodeT5            0.326   0.305 0.209 0.376 0.444   0.315     0.190 0.206 0.367 0.426   0.312   0.159 0.207 0.365 0.418
           text-embedding-ada-002   0.380   0.359 0.274 0.420 0.491   0.371     0.223 0.274 0.409 0.472   0.368   0.184 0.274 0.407 0.460
                   KEPT             0.422   0.401 0.297 0.485 0.565   0.414     0.261 0.299 0.472 0.540   0.409   0.218 0.297 0.467 0.531
                   Locus            0.359   0.333 0.287 0.435 0.443   0.356     0.194 0.287 0.426 0.443   0.353   0.169 0.287 0.417 0.426
                   GPT-2            0.374   0.345 0.261 0.391 0.470   0.353     0.228 0.261 0.374 0.426   0.348   0.181 0.261 0.374 0.400
 Hornetq      GraphCodeBERT         0.351   0.335 0.243 0.365 0.478   0.331     0.222 0.243 0.322 0.461   0.321   0.187 0.243 0.313 0.400
                  CodeT5            0.361   0.343 0.235 0.400 0.504   0.334     0.230 0.235 0.365 0.417   0.326   0.188 0.235 0.357 0.409
           text-embedding-ada-002   0.561   0.527 0.452 0.617 0.670   0.549     0.366 0.452 0.600 0.652   0.546   0.286 0.452 0.591 0.643
                   KEPT             0.567   0.535 0.470 0.591 0.670   0.548     0.399 0.470 0.583 0.609   0.544   0.324 0.470 0.583 0.609
                   Locus            0.407   0.389 0.339 0.453 0.482   0.400     0.326 0.333 0.442 0.472   0.396   0.293 0.333 0.442 0.469
                   GPT-2            0.339   0.326 0.233 0.374 0.450   0.328     0.260 0.233 0.360 0.425   0.321   0.218 0.233 0.352 0.398
 Seam2        GraphCodeBERT         0.266   0.251 0.157 0.306 0.363   0.253     0.200 0.157 0.287 0.336   0.246   0.167 0.157 0.274 0.333
                  CodeT5            0.356   0.340 0.236 0.393 0.482   0.340     0.277 0.236 0.369 0.450   0.333   0.233 0.236 0.363 0.434
           text-embedding-ada-002   0.492   0.474 0.377 0.550 0.640   0.482     0.395 0.377 0.534 0.607   0.478   0.339 0.377 0.528 0.588
                   KEPT             0.538   0.520 0.434 0.577 0.664   0.531     0.448 0.436 0.572 0.645   0.522   0.388 0.431 0.564 0.618
                   Locus            0.293   0.261 0.195 0.346 0.401   0.299     0.128 0.210 0.339 0.389   0.294   0.123 0.210 0.339 0.385
                   GPT-2            0.304   0.277 0.187 0.342 0.405   0.288     0.169 0.187 0.311 0.385   0.283   0.141 0.187 0.307 0.377
  Weld        GraphCodeBERT         0.280   0.254 0.179 0.307 0.362   0.262     0.172 0.179 0.272 0.346   0.258   0.149 0.179 0.265 0.339
                  CodeT5            0.307   0.277 0.198 0.323 0.405   0.286     0.186 0.198 0.296 0.350   0.280   0.155 0.198 0.288 0.335
           text-embedding-ada-002   0.445   0.400 0.331 0.502 0.576   0.432     0.265 0.331 0.482 0.553   0.429   0.222 0.331 0.482 0.549
                   KEPT             0.456   0.421 0.327 0.510 0.603   0.439     0.284 0.327 0.494 0.553   0.432   0.250 0.327 0.475 0.533
                   Locus            0.163   0.151 0.123 0.186 0.208   0.158     0.085 0.121 0.181 0.201   0.153   0.073 0.121 0.166 0.193
                   GPT-2            0.166   0.152 0.085 0.164 0.231   0.155     0.084 0.085 0.156 0.219   0.150   0.065 0.085 0.153 0.204
              GraphCodeBERT         0.187   0.173 0.101 0.184 0.262   0.175     0.096 0.103 0.169 0.231   0.169   0.074 0.101 0.163 0.226
 Drools           CodeT5            0.223   0.209 0.123 0.248 0.321   0.212     0.116 0.123 0.231 0.304   0.206   0.088 0.121 0.226 0.292
           text-embedding-ada-002   0.301   0.283 0.196 0.321 0.414   0.290     0.153 0.196 0.314 0.380   0.281   0.115 0.196 0.299 0.367
                   KEPT             0.339   0.318 0.221 0.382 0.462   0.328     0.176 0.221 0.365 0.435   0.322   0.134 0.221 0.359 0.422
                   Locus            0.370   0.334 0.287 0.412 0.463   0.365     0.229 0.293 0.395 0.444   0.360   0.185 0.296 0.379 0.430
                   GPT-2            0.291   0.258 0.194 0.311 0.386   0.280     0.177 0.195 0.298 0.362   0.273   0.133 0.195 0.289 0.349
              GraphCodeBERT         0.229   0.207 0.123 0.257 0.335   0.212     0.140 0.117 0.238 0.318   0.208   0.107 0.123 0.223 0.299
  Derby           CodeT5            0.320   0.289 0.230 0.345 0.406   0.307     0.201 0.230 0.331 0.381   0.301   0.156 0.229 0.321 0.371
           text-embedding-ada-002   0.336   0.304 0.234 0.381 0.441   0.327     0.210 0.234 0.371 0.417   0.319   0.156 0.234 0.355 0.401
                   KEPT             0.427   0.388 0.310 0.487 0.565   0.419     0.280 0.313 0.470 0.543   0.412   0.218 0.311 0.464 0.525
                   Locus            0.437   0.371 0.336 0.482 0.573   0.439     0.207 0.355 0.473 0.550   0.437   0.206 0.359 0.468 0.536
                   GPT-2            0.408   0.352 0.282 0.468 0.550   0.397     0.239 0.277 0.464 0.536   0.388   0.210 0.277 0.450 0.523
 Log4j2       GraphCodeBERT         0.401   0.352 0.264 0.455 0.573   0.387     0.239 0.264 0.441 0.527   0.381   0.209 0.264 0.441 0.518
                  CodeT5            0.454   0.399 0.323 0.527 0.595   0.439     0.271 0.323 0.495 0.559   0.434   0.245 0.323 0.495 0.541
           text-embedding-ada-002   0.567   0.488 0.450 0.627 0.723   0.561     0.321 0.450 0.618 0.691   0.554   0.290 0.450 0.600 0.677
                   KEPT             0.600   0.517 0.477 0.686 0.782   0.588     0.375 0.473 0.664 0.741   0.583   0.338 0.477 0.636 0.732
                   Locus            0.346   0.316 0.267 0.393 0.441   0.344     0.199 0.271 0.384 0.429   0.340   0.178 0.272 0.378 0.420
                   GPT-2            0.308   0.281 0.204 0.335 0.408   0.295     0.188 0.203 0.321 0.387   0.289   0.154 0.203 0.315 0.370
 Average      GraphCodeBERT         0.286   0.263 0.177 0.313 0.396   0.271     0.177 0.177 0.291 0.373   0.265   0.148 0.177 0.283 0.356
                  CodeT5            0.335   0.309 0.222 0.373 0.451   0.319     0.210 0.222 0.351 0.412   0.313   0.175 0.221 0.345 0.400
           text-embedding-ada-002   0.440   0.405 0.331 0.488 0.565   0.430     0.276 0.331 0.475 0.539   0.425   0.227 0.331 0.466 0.526
                   KEPT             0.478   0.443 0.362 0.531 0.616   0.467     0.318 0.363 0.517 0.581   0.461   0.267 0.362 0.507 0.567
  1 The higher the value of the MAP, MRR, and Top@N, the better.



                                                                         |𝑄 |
                                                                   1 ∑︁
                                                        𝑀𝐴𝑃 =              𝐴𝑣𝑔𝑃𝑄𝑖                                                     (5)
                                                                  |𝑄 | 𝑖=1
   Top@N measures the percentage of bugs whose associated files are detected in top N (𝑁 =1,2,3,...)
of the returned suspicious list of code files. The higher values indicate less effort required by
developers to locate the bug and, thus, better performance.
   In terms of 𝑀𝐴𝑃, 𝑀𝑅𝑅, and 𝑇𝑜𝑝@𝑁 , a higher value is better.

5 Results
5.1 Effectiveness of Kept (RQ1)
Table 3 presents the evaluation results for the effectiveness of Kept, with the best results highlighted
in bold. The evaluation results indicate that Kept achieves almost all the best results for five
metrics at three levels of changesets. Taking the commit-level as an example, Kept shows the best
performance on average across five metrics, achieving a 35.0% to 40.3% improvement over Locus. In
comparison with CodeT5, the highest-performing non-commercial LLM, Kept achieves an average
improvement of 36.6% to 63.1%. Compared with commercial LLM, text-embedding-ada-002, Kept
achieves an average improvement of 7.8% to 17.4%.
   The results of our approach show significant improvements over all the baselines at three levels
of granularity. In Table 3, all LLMs achieve better results at the coarser-grained commits level
compared to the finer-grained hunks level. For instance, CodeT5 achieved an MRR of 0.335 at the
commits level, 0.319 at the files level, and 0.313 at the hunks level. Notably, Kept exhibits a more
substantial improvement at the finer-grained levels. Using MRR as an indicator, Kept outperformed
CodeT5 by 42.56% at the commits level, 46.30% at the files level, and 47.09% at the hunks level. We

                                                Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:16                    Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang

             Table 4. Comparison of the results with and without introducing knowledge graph.
                Approach Metric      Teiid Hornetq Seam2       Weld    Drools   Derby Log4j2   Average
                          MRR        0.383 0.486   0.509       0.398   0.267    0.393 0.560     0.428
                          MAP        0.209 0.305   0.382       0.243   0.118    0.205 0.330     0.256
                 NoKG Top@1          0.282 0.400   0.417       0.288   0.184    0.297 0.450     0.331
                         Top@3       0.427 0.539   0.550       0.463   0.284    0.437 0.623     0.475
                         Top@5       0.491 0.600   0.626       0.510   0.349    0.490 0.691     0.537
                          MRR        0.395  0.481  0.518       0.406   0.256    0.400 0.585     0.434
                          MAP        0.212  0.305  0.388       0.252   0.111    0.213 0.335     0.259
                 TextKG Top@1        0.291  0.383  0.431       0.300   0.159    0.301 0.482     0.335
                         Top@3       0.441  0.530  0.566       0.436   0.291    0.443 0.645     0.479
                         Top@5       0.517  0.583  0.615       0.498   0.350    0.504 0.709     0.539
                          MRR        0.391  0.508  0.532       0.401   0.294    0.403 0.578     0.444
                          MAP        0.209  0.297  0.389       0.243   0.126    0.213 0.332     0.258
                CodeKG Top@1         0.285  0.409  0.444       0.296   0.203    0.305 0.477     0.346
                         Top@3       0.437  0.557  0.569       0.440   0.314    0.454 0.636     0.487
                         Top@5       0.509  0.609  0.623       0.502   0.382    0.506 0.686     0.545
                          MRR        0.409  0.544  0.522       0.432   0.322    0.412 0.583     0.461
                TextKG+ MAP          0.218  0.324  0.388       0.250   0.134    0.218 0.338     0.267
                         Top@1       0.297  0.470  0.431       0.327   0.221    0.311 0.477     0.362
                 CodeKG Top@3        0.467  0.583  0.564       0.475   0.359    0.464 0.636     0.507
                         Top@5       0.531  0.609  0.618       0.533   0.422    0.525 0.732     0.567


attribute this enhanced performance to the incorporation of a knowledge graph, which allows the
model to reason more effectively, especially at the hunks level where the context is often lacking.
   To further validate the evaluation results, we use the Wilcoxon signed-rank test on the five
metrics. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is a non-parametric hypothesis test used for determining
whether results are significantly different between groups, which is used in bug localization [3] and
other fields [21]. A 𝑝-𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 result less than 0.05 indicates a statistically significant difference between
Kept and the baselines with 95% confidence. According to the test results, Kept outperforms Locus,
GPT-2, GraphCodeBERT, CodeT5, and text-embedding-ada-002 on average across all metrics at
three granularities, showing statistically significant differences with 95% confidence.
   For fine-tuning, Kept required 355 minutes, making it the fastest approach among all the
LLMs evaluated. GPT-2 followed closely, taking 364 minutes. CodeT5 requires 468 minutes, while
GraphCodeBERT requires 479 minutes.
   Overall, Kept achieves average improvements on the five metrics by 33.2% to 59.5% under three
levels of changesets when compared with the classical method, Locus. Compared to the best LLM,
CodeT5, Kept achieved average improvements of 36.6% to 63.7%. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test
indicated that Kept is statistically significant compared to all the baselines on average across all
metrics at 95% confidence. The results indicate that our method, Kept, is more effective in capturing
the semantics of code and text, making the proposed approach advantageous for bug localization.

   Answer to RQ1: Kept outperforms the state-of-the-art models for bug localization, especially
   achieving 7.8% to 78.6% better results on average across five metrics with a statistically significant
   difference with a 95% confidence level.

5.2    Effectiveness of Knowledge Graph (RQ2)
To evaluate the impact of knowledge graphs on model performance, we conduct ablation experi-
ments at three granularity of changesets. Table 4 presents the evaluation results for the effectiveness
of the knowledge graph.
   Taking the commit-level results as an example, the best performance is obtained by introducing
both the code knowledge graph and the text knowledge graph (TextKG+CodeKG). TextKG+CodeKG
achieves the best results on average, with MRR at 0.461, MAP at 0.267, Top@1 at 0.362, Top@3
at 0.507, and Top@5 at 0.567, respectively. Compared to scenarios without knowledge graph,
TextKG+CodeKG achieved an average performance improvement of 6.70%, 6.24%, 9.37%, 4.93%, and
4.44% across MRR, MAP, Top@1, Top@3, and Top@5, respectively.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                               FSE086:17

      Table 5. Comparison of the results with and without soft-position embedding and visible matrix.

                Approach  Metric    Teiid Hornetq Seam2       Weld    Drools   Derby Log4j2 Average
                          MRR       0.124 0.169 0.173         0.190   0.097    0.137 0.240   0.161
                          MAP       0.061 0.100 0.103         0.100   0.042    0.062 0.120   0.084
               BERT-w/o Top@1       0.060 0.087 0.092         0.117   0.047    0.073 0.145   0.089
                         Top@3      0.132 0.209 0.195         0.198   0.098    0.149 0.268   0.178
                         Top@5      0.166 0.261 0.236         0.249   0.128    0.193 0.345   0.225
                          MRR       0.292 0.398 0.386         0.307   0.228    0.260 0.457   0.333
               CodeBERT- MAP        0.148 0.233 0.284         0.177   0.097    0.143 0.261   0.192
                         Top@1      0.200 0.296 0.276         0.191   0.146    0.162 0.336   0.230
                  w/o    Top@3      0.322 0.443 0.439         0.362   0.259    0.306 0.509   0.377
                         Top@5      0.381 0.487 0.512         0.432   0.306    0.357 0.595   0.439
                          MRR       0.383 0.486 0.509         0.398   0.267    0.393 0.560   0.428
                          MAP       0.209 0.305 0.382         0.243   0.118    0.205 0.330   0.256
               KEPT-w/o Top@1       0.282 0.400 0.417         0.288   0.184    0.297 0.450   0.331
                         Top@3      0.427 0.539 0.550         0.463   0.284    0.437 0.623   0.475
                         Top@5      0.491 0.600 0.626         0.510   0.349    0.490 0.691   0.537
                          MRR       0.138 0.228 0.180         0.189   0.089    0.143 0.234   0.172
                 BERT-    MAP       0.069 0.118 0.111         0.102   0.037    0.064 0.120   0.089
                         Top@1      0.074 0.165 0.119         0.109   0.040    0.080 0.159   0.107
                w/SPVM Top@3        0.133 0.217 0.176         0.218   0.081    0.151 0.245   0.174
                         Top@5      0.184 0.304 0.228         0.265   0.115    0.194 0.314   0.229
                          MRR       0.303 0.450 0.428         0.312   0.221    0.273 0.502   0.356
               CodeBERT- MAP        0.155 0.241 0.307         0.180   0.100    0.144 0.277   0.201
                         Top@1      0.204 0.383 0.331         0.206   0.136    0.171 0.395   0.261
                w/SPVM Top@3        0.339 0.470 0.472         0.350   0.241    0.314 0.568   0.393
                         Top@5      0.412 0.522 0.534         0.412   0.304    0.384 0.632   0.457
                          MRR       0.409 0.544 0.522         0.432   0.322    0.412 0.583   0.461
                 KEPT-    MAP       0.218 0.324 0.388         0.250   0.134    0.218 0.338   0.267
                         Top@1      0.297 0.470 0.431         0.327   0.221    0.311 0.477   0.362
                w/SPVM Top@3        0.467 0.583 0.564         0.475   0.359    0.464 0.636   0.507
                         Top@5      0.531 0.609 0.618         0.533   0.422    0.525 0.732   0.567
  1 SPVM is an acronym for soft-position embedding and visible matrix.


   At the commit-level granularity, enhancing the LLM using the text knowledge graph alone
(TextKG) and using the code knowledge graph alone (CodeKG) achieves better results than those
without using the knowledge graph. In most cases, CodeKG performs better than TextKG, which
might be attributed to the number of CodeKG additions in most projects greater than those of
TextKG. A possible reason is that, compared to historical documentation, historical code repositories
have constructed a more extensive knowledge graph. The code knowledge graph consists of 403,118
code entities and 862,473 code relationships, along with 5,780 knowledge entities and 20,604
corresponding relationships.
   Again, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test is performed on the results of the ablation experiments at three
levels of changesets to verify their statistical significance. The results show that the differences are
statistically significant with a 𝑝-𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 less than 0.05, indicating a significant improvement without
introducing knowledge graphs.
   For fine-tuning, NoKG takes 291 minutes, TextKG takes 308 minutes, and CodeKG takes 328
minutes. TextKG+CodeKG together require 355 minutes, which is only a 22% increase over NoKG.
   In general, the performance of the LLM enhanced by introducing the code knowledge graph
and text knowledge graph has been improved by 4.3% to 9.5% when compared to the LLM without
introducing a knowledge graph. With 95% confidence, the difference between the knowledge-
enhanced LLM and the LLM without using a knowledge graph is statistically significant.

  Answer to RQ2: The model Kept enhanced with knowledge graph performs better than the
  model without knowledge graph enhancement. With a 95% confidence level, there is a significant
  difference between introducing knowledge graphs and not introducing one.

5.3   Effectiveness of Soft-Position Embedding and Visible Matrix (RQ3)
To evaluate the impact of our proposed model structure, we selected two widely used encoder-
structured models, BERT and CodeBERT, which have structures similar to Kept.
   The evaluation results indicate that our proposed model structure, which uses Soft-Position
embedding and Visible Matrices (SPVM) for representation, generally achieves better performance.

                                    Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:18                    Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang


In comparison with BERT -w/o, BERT -w/SPVM achieved an average improvement of 8.3% to 18.9%.
The evaluation results show that the model structure proposed in this paper achieves the best
results for almost all projects. The results indicate that the bug localization technique proposed in
this paper can be extended to be a general and effective structure for various advanced LLMs.
    Answer to RQ3: Three LLMs (i.e., BERT, CodeBERT, KEPT) that use the model structure proposed
    in this study perform better than those that do not use it, demonstrating the effectiveness of this
    model structure.
6     Threats to Validity
In this section, we discuss the potential threats to the validity of the study and our efforts to mitigate
their impacts.
   Internal validity. We identify two threats to internal validity for this study. The first concern
is that our experimental results depend on the knowledge graph construction tool we use. To
mitigate this threat, we selected a popular tool that achieves the highest precision and recall [7, 24].
The second threat to internal validity is potential errors in implementing our approach and the
baselines. We mitigated this threat by using the original source code and hyperparameter settings
that were shared by the baselines [11, 32, 46, 47]. In addition, we carefully check the datasets and
source code used in this study to make sure they are correct.
   External validity. The threat to external validity of this study arises from the ability to generalize
our research to the external. Kept is implemented and evaluated on seven OSS projects, and the
performance of Kept on commercial projects is unknown. We selected seven projects that contained
more than 6,000 bugs to possibly reduce this external validity. In addition, the main structure of
Kept is based on UniXcoder, which is used in other fields.
   Construct validity. The construct validity of a study is derived from the metrics that we select,
that is, making sure that the chosen metrics are compatible with the study’s approach and design
to generate reliable results. As a result, we use widely used evaluation metrics in bug localization,
such as MAP, MRR, and Top@N, in an effort to minimize this threat.

7     Related Work
IR techniques can significantly reduce the developer’s burden of debugging [26] and maintain-
ing software [15, 35], and it is one of the most widely researched techniques for automatic bug
localization [31, 53]. While IR-based methods form a substantial part of bug localization research,
alternative approaches have also been explored. One such line of research focuses on the coverage
of failing and passing tests. A notable recent contribution in this area is Fonte, proposed by An et
al. [1]. Fonte is an efficient and accurate bug-inducing commit identification technique that uniquely
relies solely on test coverage. It innovatively combines fault localization with bug-inducing commit
identification to rank commits based on the suspiciousness of the code elements they modify. It is
important to note that fault localization and IR-based methods are not mutually exclusive; in fact,
they can complement each other effectively. However, due to the constraints of our dataset, which
lacks the failed test execution and commit history required by Fonte, we are unable to include it as
a baseline in our study.
   Given these considerations, our review of related work will primarily focus on relevant IR-based
methods and research that has informed the design of our approach.

7.1    Traditional Machine Learning Approaches
Machine learning methods are commonly used in bug localization since they can acquire and
integrate knowledge from large-scale observations, and are able to improve with the acquisition of
new information. Early research in bug localization relied on machine learning methods, which can

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                             FSE086:19


process large-scale observations and improve with new information Using the bag of words, early
researchers calculated the similarity between the bug report and the source code by comparing
the frequency of the same term in them. To calculate the similarity between the query and the
source code file, Robertson et al. proposed a method based on TF-IDF, which combines the reverse
document of the query word in the corpus with the word frequency in the source code file [34]. In
later work, Wang et al. [44] proposed several vector space models based on different forms of TF
and IDF calculation. The experimental results show that the combined method outperforms the
standard VSM model.
   Gore et al. [8] proposed a hybrid model that combines VSM and N-gram for bug localization.
Compared with traditional methods, the hybrid model outperforms some existing state-of-the-art
techniques for bug localization. Several bug localization models have also been developed, including
DHbPd [37], BLUiR [36], BRTracer [49], Amalgam [43], LOCUS [47], and others, that combine
additional information on software project versions and code changes to locate bugs.

7.2   Deep Learning Approaches
Deep learning has gradually gained traction after machine learning for bug localization. Generally,
these models rely on deep learning models to extract semantics from bug reports and source
code, and to match the similarity between them. In deep learning-based bug localization, feature
extraction is often at the core of the process [58]. Deep learning models are primarily used to
extract complex semantic relationships between source code and bug reports. The three most
common deep learning models are CNN, RNN, and DNN. Huo et al. [14] proposed NP-CNN, a
CNN-based deep learning network for bug localization that uses both lexical and program structure
information to learn unified features from natural language and source code for automatically
locating buggy code. Experimental results on a wide range of software projects show that NP-CNN
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in bug localization. Wang et al. [40] proposed a
Multi-Dimension Convolutional Neural Network (MD-CNN) model for bug localization based on
bug reports. According to the evaluation results, Wang et al. found that MD-CNN outperformed
existing bug localization techniques. Yang et al. [52] propose a hybrid RNN-attention model called
MRAM, which combines bug-fixing features and method-structured features to explore their
relevance. Experimental results indicate that the model performs significantly better than the
baseline. Lam et al. [18] combined a DNN with rVSM, using rVSM to collect features of textual
similarity between bug reports and source files. Experimental results indicate that combining
a DNN with rVSM performs significantly better than the baselines. Only one study proposed a
knowledge graph-based approach based on structure features and applied hyperbolic attention
embedding to get the link prediction scores [50]. This approach has three main limitations. Firstly, it
represents bug report IDs and code IDs as nodes in a knowledge graph, which results in a significant
loss of textual and code information. Second, the method relies solely on syntactic information
from the text and code, overlooking the rich semantic information. Finally, the approach does not
incorporate external knowledge that is often available in projects, such as technical documentation,
which can assist the model to better learn the information contained in both bug reports and code.
As the replication package for this work was not provided, we were not able to reproduce the
results for comparison. We chose Locus as the baseline because it provides a replication package
and is a traditional approach for bug localization based on changesets.

7.3   LLM-based Approaches
LLMs have gradually been applied to bug localization in recent years, with high performance in
many fields. Transformer-based neural network architecture has become dominant, achieving
promising performance in many natural language processing tasks and code representations. Zhu

                                  Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:20                    Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang


et al. [58] proposed a COOBA model that embeds the text in bug reports using an unsupervised
learning algorithm, GloVe, and encodes them using bidirectional LSTMs. The code file is converted
into AST and then embedded by GloVe. Finally, they extracted private and public features of the
projects. Lin et al. [23] propose a novel framework for generating traceable links between source
code and natural language artifacts. The experimental results show that their model outperforms
the VSM model in stabilization among the three OSS projects. Liang et al. [22] proposed the FLIM
model that uses an LLM, CodeBERT, and fine-tunes it for code search tasks. Furthermore, they
employed the FLIM model to locate bugs using semantic features extracted from code files and
bug reports. Asudani et al. [2] embedded code files using a LLM, GloVe, to improve DeepLoc, and
embedded bug reports with sent2vec. The results indicate the effect of extracting features based on
different embedding methods.
   Several studies have proposed enhancing LLMs with knowledge in natural language processing [9,
13, 25, 41, 45]. The success of these studies inspires us to focus on domain-specific data. In contrast
to these studies, we focus on bug reports and changesets that are relevant to bug localization.
Bug reports and changesets often lack grammatical structure, making understanding challenging.
Different from them, we introduce domain knowledge to enhance LLMs. We also incorporate
soft-position embedding, visible matrices, and mask Transformer to represent domain knowledge.

8   Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we propose Kept, a knowledge-enhanced LLM designed to improve bug localization
performance. First, we construct the text knowledge graph and the code knowledge graph using
project documents and source code, respectively, to represent external domain knowledge. Second,
we use soft-position embedding, visible matrices, and mask Transformer to represent this domain
knowledge. Finally, we pre-train the model on the tasks aligned with the target task before fine-
tuning it for downstream tasks. The evaluation results indicate that Kept significantly improves
bug localization performance. As compared to the traditional method, Locus, Kept improves the
performance of evaluation metrics by 33.2% to 59.5% in bug localization. As compared to the best-
performing LLM in baselines, CodeT5, Kept shows a significant improvement of 36.6% to 63.7%.
The Wilcoxon signed rank test confirms that Kept exhibits statistically significant differences from
all baseline methods. Therefore, the evaluation results significantly demonstrate the effectiveness of
Kept for bug localization, as well as confirm the positive impact of our approach by leveraging the
knowledge enhanced LLM for bug localization. In the future, we intend to continuously reinforce
bug localization by improving the knowledge-enhanced LLM. In addition, we plan to evaluate our
model in a wider range of scenarios and projects.

9   Data Availability
The datasets and source code used in this study are open source, and can easily be accessed by
anyone. The datasets and source code are released at: https://github.com/keptmodel/KEPT.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62072227,
No.62202219, No.62302210), the Jiangsu Provincial Key Research and Development Program (No.BE2
021002-2), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No.BK20241195), and the Innova-
tion Project and Overseas Open Project of State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
(Nanjing University) (ZZKT2024A18, ZZKT2024B07, KFKT2023A09, KFKT2023A10, KFKT2024A02,
KFKT2024A13, KFKT2024A14).

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                                  FSE086:21


References
 [1] Gabin An, Jingun Hong, Naryeong Kim, and Shin Yoo. 2023. Fonte: Finding Bug Inducing Commits from Failures.
     In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’23). IEEE, Melbourne,
     Australia, 589–601.
 [2] Deepak Suresh Asudani, Naresh Kumar Nagwani, and Pradeep Singh. 2023. Impact of word embedding models on text
     analytics in deep learning environment: a review. Artificial Intelligence Review 56, 9 (2023), 10345–10425.
 [3] Dylan Callaghan and Bernd Fischer. 2023. Improving Spectrum-Based Localization of Multiple Faults by Iterative Test
     Suite Reduction. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
     (ISSTA’23). ACM, Seattle, WA, USA, 1445–1457.
 [4] Agnieszka Ciborowska and Kostadin Damevski. 2022. Fast Changeset-Based Bug Localization with BERT. In Proceedings
     of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’22). ACM, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 946–957.
 [5] Yali Du and Zhongxing Yu. 2023. Pre-training Code Representation with Semantic Flow Graph for Effective Bug
     Localization. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
     Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE’23). ACM, San Francisco, CA, USA, 579–591.
 [6] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu,
     Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. CodeBERT: A Pre-Trained Model for Programming and Natural Languages. In
     Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu (Eds.).
     ACM, Online, 1536–1547.
 [7] K Gashteovski, R Gemulla, and L Del Corro. 2017. MinIE: Minimizing facts in open information extraction. Association
     for Computational Linguistics (2017), 1–11.
 [8] Alpa Gore, Siddharth Dutt Choubey, and Kopal Gangrade. 2016. Improved Bug Localization Technique Using Hybrid
     Information Retrieval Model. In Proceedings of the 12th Distributed Computing and Internet Technology (ICDCIT’16),
     Nikolaj Bjørner, Sanjiva Prasad, and Laxmi Parida (Eds.). Springer, Bhubaneswar, India, 127–131.
 [9] Jian Guan, Fei Huang, Zhihao Zhao, Xiaoyan Zhu, and Minlie Huang. 2020. A Knowledge-Enhanced Pretraining Model
     for Commonsense Story Generation. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8 (2020), 93–108.
[10] Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Nan Duan, Yanlin Wang, Ming Zhou, and Jian Yin. 2022. UniXcoder: Unified Cross-Modal
     Pre-training for Code Representation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 7212–7225.
[11] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie LIU, Long Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy,
     Shengyu Fu, Michele Tufano, Shao Kun Deng, Colin Clement, Dawn Drain, Neel Sundaresan, Jian Yin, Daxin Jiang, and
     Ming Zhou. 2021. GraphCodeBERT: Pre-training Code Representations with Data Flow. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations (ICLR’21). 1–18.
[12] Xu Han, Zhengyan Zhang, Ning Ding, Yuxian Gu, Xiao Liu, Yuqi Huo, Jiezhong Qiu, Yuan Yao, Ao Zhang, Liang
     Zhang, Wentao Han, Minlie Huang, Qin Jin, Yanyan Lan, Yang Liu, Zhiyuan Liu, Zhiwu Lu, Xipeng Qiu, Ruihua Song,
     Jie Tang, Ji-Rong Wen, Jinhui Yuan, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Jun Zhu. 2021. Pre-trained models: Past, present and future.
     AI Open 2 (2021), 225–250.
[13] Linmei Hu, Zeyi Liu, Ziwang Zhao, Lei Hou, Liqiang Nie, and Juanzi Li. 2024. A Survey of Knowledge Enhanced
     Pre-Trained Language Models. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 36, 4 (2024), 1413–1430.
[14] Xuan Huo, Ming Li, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. 2016. Learning Unified Features from Natural and Programming Languages
     for Locating Buggy Source Code. In Proceedings of the 25th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     (IJCAI’16). AAAI Press, New York, USA, 1606–1612.
[15] Xuan Huo, Ferdian Thung, Ming Li, David Lo, and Shu-Ting Shi. 2021. Deep Transfer Bug Localization. IEEE
     Transactions on Software Engineering 47, 7 (2021), 1368–1380.
[16] Darryl Jarman, Jeffrey Berry, Riley Smith, Ferdian Thung, and David Lo. 2022. Legion: Massively Composing Rankers
     for Improved Bug Localization at Adobe. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 48, 8 (2022), 3010–3024.
[17] Ashwini Jaya Kumar, Christoph Schmidt, and Joachim Köhler. 2017. A knowledge graph based speech interface for
     question answering systems. Speech Communication 92 (2017), 1–12.
[18] An Ngoc Lam, Anh Tuan Nguyen, Hoan Anh Nguyen, and Tien N. Nguyen. 2017. Bug Localization with Combination of
     Deep Learning and Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Program Comprehension
     (ICPC’17). IEEE, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 218–229.
[19] Jaekwon Lee, Dongsun Kim, Tegawendé F. Bissyandé, Woosung Jung, and Yves Le Traon. 2018. Bench4BL: Repro-
     ducibility Study on the Performance of IR-Based Bug Localization. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGSOFT International
     Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA’2018). ACM, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 61–72.
[20] Yuxuan Lei, Jianxun Lian, Jing Yao, Mingqi Wu, Defu Lian, and Xing Xie. 2024. Aligning Language Models for Versatile
     Text-based Item Retrieval. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 (Singapore, Singapore) (WWW
     ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 935–938.



                                      Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE086:22                     Yue Li, Bohan Liu, Ting Zhang, Zhiqi Wang, David Lo, Lanxin Yang, Jun Lyu, and He Zhang


[21] Yue Li, Zhong Ren, Zhiqi Wang, Lanxin Yang, Liming Dong, Chenxing Zhong, and He Zhang. 2024. Fine-SE: Integrating
     Semantic Features and Expert Features for Software Effort Estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International
     Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’24) (Lisbon, Portugal). ACM, Article 27, 12 pages.
[22] Hongliang Liang, Dengji Hang, and Xiangyu Li. 2022. Modeling function-level interactions for file-level bug localization.
     Empirical Software Engineering 27, 7 (2022), 1–26.
[23] Jinfeng Lin, Yalin Liu, Qingkai Zeng, Meng Jiang, and Jane Cleland-Huang. 2021. Traceability Transformed: Generating
     More Accurate Links with Pre-Trained BERT Models. In Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Software
     Engineering (ICSE’21). IEEE, Madrid, ES, 324–335.
[24] Edward Loper and Steven Bird. 2002. NLTK: the Natural Language Toolkit. In Proceedings of the ACL-02 Workshop on
     Effective Tools and Methodologies for Teaching Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics (ETMTNLP
     ’02) (ETMTNLP ’02). ACM, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 63–70.
[25] Lipeng Ma, Weidong Yang, Bo Xu, Sihang Jiang, Ben Fei, Jiaqing Liang, Mingjie Zhou, and Yanghua Xiao. 2024.
     KnowLog: Knowledge Enhanced Pre-trained Language Model for Log Understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
     46th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’24). ACM, Lisbon, Portugal, Article 32, 13 pages.
[26] Vijayaraghavan Murali, Lee Gross, Rebecca Qian, and Satish Chandra. 2021. Industry-Scale IR-Based Bug Localization:
     A Perspective from Facebook. In Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
     Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP’21). IEEE, Madrid, ES, 188–197.
[27] Chao Ni, Wei Wang, Kaiwen Yang, Xin Xia, Kui Liu, and David Lo. 2022. The Best of Both Worlds: Integrating Semantic
     Features with Expert Features for Defect Prediction and Localization. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European
     Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’22). ACM,
     Singapore, Singapore, 672–683.
[28] Feifei Niu, Wesley K. G. Assunção, LiGuo Huang, Christoph Mayr-Dorn, Jidong Ge, Bin Luo, and Alexander Egyed.
     2023. RAT: A Refactoring-Aware Traceability Model for Bug Localization. In Proceedings of the 45th International
     Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’23). IEEE, Melbourne, Australia, 196–207.
[29] OpenAI. 2022. text-embedding-ada-002. https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/embeddings.
[30] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming
     Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison,
     Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. PyTorch: An
     Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. Curran Associates Inc., Vancouver Canada, 1–12.
[31] Michael Pradel, Vijayaraghavan Murali, Rebecca Qian, Mateusz Machalica, Erik Meijer, and Satish Chandra. 2020.
     Scaffle: Bug Localization on Millions of Files. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
     Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA’20). ACM, Virtual Event, USA, 225–236.
[32] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language Models are
     Unsupervised Multitask Learners. arXiv, 1–24.
[33] Michael Rath, David Lo, and Patrick Mäder. 2018. Analyzing Requirements and Traceability Information to Improve
     Bug Localization. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR’18). ACM,
     Gothenburg, Sweden, 442–453.
[34] Stephen.E. Robertson and Karen. Spärck Jones. 1994. Simple, proven approaches to text retrieval. Technical Report.
     University of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory.
[35] Giovanni Rosa, Luca Pascarella, Simone Scalabrino, Rosalia Tufano, Gabriele Bavota, Michele Lanza, and Rocco Oliveto.
     2021. Evaluating SZZ Implementations Through a Developer-Informed Oracle. In Proceedings of the 43rd International
     Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’21). IEEE, Madrid, Spain, 436–447.
[36] Ripon K. Saha, Matthew Lease, Sarfraz Khurshid, and Dewayne E. Perry. 2013. Improving bug localization using
     structured information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Automated Software Engineering
     (ASE’13). IEEE, Silicon Valley, CA, USA, 345–355.
[37] Bunyamin Sisman and Avinash C. Kak. 2012. Incorporating version histories in Information Retrieval based bug
     localization. In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR’12). IEEE, Zurich,
     Switzerland, 50–59.
[38] Tianxiang Sun, Yunfan Shao, Xipeng Qiu, Qipeng Guo, Yaru Hu, Xuanjing Huang, and Zheng Zhang. 2020. Co-
     LAKE: Contextualized Language and Knowledge Embedding. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
     Computational Linguistics (COLING’20). ICCL, Barcelona, Spain (Online), 3660–3670.
[39] Jeniya Tabassum, Mounica Maddela, Wei Xu, and Alan Ritter. 2020. Code and Named Entity Recognition in StackOver-
     flow. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL’20). ACL, Online,
     4913–4926.
[40] Bei Wang, Ling Xu, Meng Yan, Chao Liu, and Ling Liu. 2022. Multi-Dimension Convolutional Neural Network for Bug
     Localization. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 15, 3 (2022), 1649–1663.



Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
A Knowledge Enhanced Large Language Model for Bug Localization                                                    FSE086:23


[41] Jianing Wang, Chengyu Wang, Minghui Qiu, Qiuhui Shi, Hongbin Wang, Jun Huang, and Ming Gao. 2022. KECP:
     Knowledge Enhanced Contrastive Prompting for Few-shot Extractive Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 2022
     Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. ACL, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 3152–3163.
[42] Qing Wang, Lang Gou, Nan Jiang, Meiru Che, Ronghui Zhang, Yun Yang, and Mingshu Li. 2008. Estimating fixing
     effort and schedule based on defect injection distribution. Software Process: Improvement and Practice 13, 1 (2008),
     35–50.
[43] Shaowei Wang and David Lo. 2014. Version History, Similar Report, and Structure: Putting Them Together for
     Improved Bug Localization. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC’14).
     ACM, Hyderabad, India, 53–63.
[44] Shaowei Wang, David Lo, and Julia Lawall. 2014. Compositional Vector Space Models for Improved Bug Localization. In
     Proceedings of the 30th IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME’14). IEEE, Victoria,
     BC, Canada, 171–180.
[45] Xiaozhi Wang, Tianyu Gao, Zhaocheng Zhu, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, Juanzi Li, and Jian Tang. 2021. KEPLER:
     A Unified Model for Knowledge Embedding and Pre-trained Language Representation. Transactions of the Association
     for Computational Linguistics 9 (2021), 176–194.
[46] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven C. H. Hoi. 2021. CodeT5: Identifier-aware Unified Pre-trained
     Encoder-Decoder Models for Code Understanding and Generation. arXiv, 1–13.
[47] Ming Wen, Rongxin Wu, and Shing-Chi Cheung. 2016. Locus: Locating Bugs from Software Changes. In Proceedings of
     the 31st International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE’16). ACM, Singapore, Singapore, 262–273.
[48] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim
     Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien
     Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2019.
     HuggingFace’s Transformers: State-of-the-art Natural Language Processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
     Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations (EMNLP’20). ACL, online, 38–45.
[49] Chu-Pan Wong, Yingfei Xiong, Hongyu Zhang, Dan Hao, Lu Zhang, and Hong Mei. 2014. Boosting Bug-Report-
     Oriented Fault Localization with Segmentation and Stack-Trace Analysis. In Proceedings of the 30th IEEE International
     Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME’14). IEEE, Victoria, BC, Canada, 181–190.
[50] Xi Xiao, Renjie Xiao, Qing Li, Jianhui Lv, Shunyan Cui, and Qixu Liu. 2023. BugRadar: Bug localization by knowledge
     graph link prediction. Information and Software Technology 162 (2023), 1–13.
[51] Yichong Xu, Chenguang Zhu, Shuohang Wang, Siqi Sun, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Pengcheng He,
     Michael Zeng, and Xuedong Huang. 2022. Human parity on commonsenseqa: Augmenting self-attention with external
     attention. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’22). 2762–2768.
[52] Shouliang Yang, Junming Cao, Hushuang Zeng, Beijun Shen, and Hao Zhong. 2021. Locating Faulty Methods with
     a Mixed RNN and Attention Model. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Program Comprehension
     (ICPC’21). IEEE, Madrid, Spain, 207–218.
[53] Zhou Yang, Jieke Shi, Shaowei Wang, and David Lo. 2021. IncBL: Incremental Bug Localization. In Proceedings of the
     36th International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE’21). IEEE, Melbourne, Australia, 1223–1226.
[54] Jinsung Yoon, Yanfei Chen, Sercan Arik, and Tomas Pfister. 2024. Search-Adaptor: Embedding Customization for
     Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
     (ACL’24), Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.). ACM, Bangkok, Thailand, 12230–12247.
[55] Zhuo Zhang, Yan Lei, Xiaoguang Mao, Meng Yan, Xin Xia, and David Lo. 2023. Context-Aware Neural Fault Localization.
     IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49, 7 (2023), 3939–3954.
[56] Zhuosheng Zhang, Hai Zhao, Masao Utiyama, and Eiichiro Sumita. 2023. Language Model Pre-training on True
     Negatives. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’23), Vol. 37. Washington DC, USA,
     14002–14010.
[57] Jian Zhou, Hongyu Zhang, and David Lo. 2012. Where should the bugs be fixed? More accurate information retrieval-
     based bug localization based on bug reports. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Software Engineering
     (ICSE’12). IEEE, Zurich, Switzerland, 14–24.
[58] Ziye Zhu, Yun Li, Hanghang Tong, and Yu Wang. 2020. CooBa: Cross-project Bug Localization via Adversarial Transfer
     Learning. In Proceedings of the 29th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’20). ACM, Vienna,
     Austria, 3565–3571.
[59] Weiqin Zou, David Lo, Zhenyu Chen, Xin Xia, Yang Feng, and Baowen Xu. 2020. How Practitioners Perceive Automated
     Bug Report Management Techniques. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 46, 8 (2020), 836–862.

Received 2024-09-13; accepted 2025-04-01




                                       Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE086. Publication date: July 2025.
