                                                                                                        PDF Download
                                                                                                        3729357.pdf
                                                                                                        04 April 2026
                                                                                                        Total Citations: 0
                                                                                                        Total Downloads: 358
    .
    .
        Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3729357




                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                Published: 19 June 2025
        .
                                                                                                Accepted: 01 April 2025
        .
    RESEARCH-ARTICLE                                                                            Received: 25 February 2025
    Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-




                                                                                                .
                                                                                                .
                                                                                                Citation in BibTeX format
    Tuning




                                                                                                .
                                                                                                .
    KEYU LIANG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
    .
    ZHONGXIN LIU, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
    .
    CHAO LIU, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
    .
    ZHIYUAN WAN, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
    .
    DAVID LO, Singapore Management University, Singapore City, Singapore
    .
    XIAOHU YANG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
    .
    .
    .
    Open Access Support provided by:
    .
    Chongqing University
    .
    Zhejiang University
    .
    Singapore Management University
    .
                                             Proceedings of the ACM on Soware Engineering, Volume 2, Issue FSE (June 2025)
                                                                                            hps://doi.org/10.1145/3729357
                                                                                                          EISSN: 2994-970X
.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning
KEYU LIANG, Zhejiang University, China
ZHONGXIN LIU∗ , Zhejiang University, China
CHAO LIU, Chongqing University, China
ZHIYUAN WAN, Zhejiang University, China
DAVID LO, Singapore Management University, Singapore
XIAOHU YANG, Zhejiang University, China
Code search is a crucial task in software engineering, aiming to retrieve code snippets that are semantically
relevant to a natural language query. Recently, Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) have shown remarkable
success and are widely adopted for code search tasks. However, PLM-based methods often struggle in cross-
domain scenarios. When applied to a new domain, they typically require extensive fine-tuning with substantial
data. Even worse, the data scarcity problem in new domains often forces these methods to operate in a
zero-shot setting, resulting in a significant decline in performance. RAPID, which generates synthetic data for
model fine-tuning, is currently the only effective method for zero-shot cross-domain code search. Despite
its effectiveness, RAPID demands substantial computational resources for fine-tuning and needs to maintain
specialized models for each domain, underscoring the need for a zero-shot, fine-tuning-free approach for
cross-domain code search.
    The key to tackling zero-shot cross-domain code search lies in bridging the gaps among domains. In
this work, we propose to break the query-code matching process of code search into two simpler tasks:
query-comment matching and code-code matching. We first conduct an empirical study to investigate the
effectiveness of these two matching schemas in zero-shot cross-domain code search. Our findings highlight the
strong complementarity among the three matching schemas, i.e., query-code, query-comment, and code-code
matching. Based on the findings, we propose CodeBridge, a zero-shot, fine-tuning-free approach for cross-
domain code search. Specifically, CodeBridge first employs zero-shot prompting to guide Large Language
Models (LLMs) to generate a comment for each code snippet in the codebase and produce a code for each
query. Subsequently, it encodes queries, code snippets, comments, and the generated code using PLMs and
assesses similarities through three matching schemas: query-code, query-comment, and generated code-code.
Lastly, CodeBridge leverages a sampling-based fusion approach that combines these three similarity scores to
rank the final search outcomes. Experimental results show that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art
PLM-based code search approaches, i.e., CoCoSoDa and UniXcoder, by an average of 21.4% and 24.9% in MRR,
respectively, across three datasets. Our approach also yields results that are better than or comparable to those
of the zero-shot cross-domain code search approach RAPID, which requires costly fine-tuning.
∗ Zhongxin Liu is the corresponding author and is also with Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain

and Data Security

Authors’ Contact Information: Keyu Liang, The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, liangkeyu@zju.edu.cn; Zhongxin Liu, The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, liu_zx@zju.edu.cn; Chao Liu, School of Big Data and Software Engineering, Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China, liu.chao@cqu.edu.cn; Zhiyuan Wan, The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data
Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, wanzhiyuan@zju.edu.cn; David Lo, School of Computing and Information
Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore, Singapore, davidlo@smu.edu.sg; Xiaohu Yang, The State Key
Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, yangxh@zju.edu.cn.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 2994-970X/2025/7-ARTFSE087
https://doi.org/10.1145/3729357


                                       Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:2                                 Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software development techniques.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Code Search, Pretrained Language Models, Zero-Shot Learning, Cross-
Domain
ACM Reference Format:
Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang. 2025. Zero-Shot Cross-
Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 2, FSE, Article FSE087 (July 2025), 23 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3729357

1   Introduction
Code search aims to retrieve the code snippets that are semantically relevant to a provided natural
language query from a codebase. It is one of the most frequent activities in software develop-
ment [Xia et al. 2017], and can greatly enhance the efficiency of developers by assisting them in
reusing the code from existing code repositories [Liu et al. 2021a; Sachdev et al. 2018]. In the era of
large language models (LLMs), code search has gained new significance as a key component in
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [Lewis et al. 2020] and in-context learning [Brown et al.
2020] which are widely used to improve tasks like code generation [Patel et al. 2024; Zhang et al.
2023]. To this end, many approaches have been proposed to improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of code search [Feng et al. 2020; Gu et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2022; Lv et al. 2015].
   Early studies leverage information retrieval techniques for code search [Bajracharya et al. 2014;
Liu et al. 2021b; Lv et al. 2015]. These methods primarily employ unsupervised text-matching
algorithms, e.g., BM25 [Robertson et al. 2009], to match queries and code snippets. However,
these methods have proved insufficient for capturing deep semantics of queries and code snippets,
limiting their effectiveness [Gu et al. 2018]. To better understand such semantics, prior works
propose building neural models to encode queries and code snippets as embeddings and match
queries and code snippets based on the similarity between their embeddings [Cheng and Kuang
2022; Gu et al. 2018; Shuai et al. 2020]. Recently, due to the impressive understanding ability of
pre-trained language models (PLMs) [Feng et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2022, 2020; Wang et al. 2023c,
2021b], researchers propose fine-tuning pre-trained language models with high-quality query-code
pairs for code search [Li et al. 2022; Shi et al. 2023a] and achieved state-of-the-art performance. We
refer to such methods as PLM-based methods.
   However, recent research shows that PLM-based methods exhibit significant performance degra-
dation when applied to a domain, e.g., a new programming language, where they haven’t been
fine-tuned [Fan et al. 2024]. A straightforward remedy is to collect query-code pairs from the new
domain and fine-tune the pre-trained model with these data. Specifically, query-code pairs can
be either synthesized with comment-code pairs collected from code repositories or constructed
manually. However, in practice, the synthesis of high-quality query-code pairs often suffers from
the shortage of code comments in software projects [Briand 2003; Spinellis 2010] and the prevalence
of documentation issues [Aghajani et al. 2020; Steidl et al. 2013]. Such data scarcity can be more
severe for low-resource domains. On the other hand, fine-tuning PLMs requires a sufficient number
of query-code pairs, and thus it is costly to construct them manually. These constraints lead to a
more practical code search scenario, where we perform cross-domain code search without using
any query-code pair from the target domain. We refer to this scenario as zero-shot cross-domain
code search.
   Due to the gap between domains, such as the distinct characteristics of various programming
languages, it is challenging to develop a universal approach for zero-shot cross-domain code search.
Currently, RAPID [Fan et al. 2024] is the only effective method capable of handling zero-shot
cross-domain code search. It involves generating pseudo queries for code snippets from the target

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                       FSE087:3


domain using generative models and subsequently fine-tuning PLMs as retrieval models with the
synthesized data. While this method yields satisfactory results, it presents several limitations. First,
the fine-tuning process demands significant computational resources [Shi et al. 2023b]. Second, each
unique domain requires a specialized model, leading to increased financial costs and management
complexity. Considering the aforementioned issues, a zero-shot, fine-tuning-free approach for
cross-domain code search would be more practical and appealing.
   The challenge of zero-shot cross-domain code search lies in the domain gaps, which make the
query-code mapping knowledge that code search models learned in some domains cannot be
directly adopted to another domain. Thus, the key to tackling this challenging task is bridging the
domain gaps. To bridge the gap, our idea is that the query-code matching process of code search,
which involves both natural language understanding and programming language comprehension
[Liu et al. 2021a], can be broken down into two easier tasks: query-comment matching and code-
code matching. Query-comment matching refers to retrieving code comments for a given query and
returning the associated code, while code-code matching denotes retrieving the target code snippet
when given another code snippet example that satisfies the query. These two matching schemas
operate at similar levels of abstraction, which may help reduce the reliance on domain-specific
mapping knowledge, thereby potentially mitigating the impact of domain gaps.
   To explore the feasibility of this idea and understand why it can work, we first conduct an
empirical study in a zero-shot cross-domain scenario. We mainly focus on three key research
questions (RQs):
      • RQ1: How effective is query-comment matching compared to query-code matching?
      • RQ2: How effective is code-code matching compared to query-code matching?
      • RQ3: Can the three matching schemas complement each other?
Through the empirical study, we find that: (1) Query-comment matching and code-code
matching outperform query-code matching in certain cases. (2) There is a high degree of
complementarity among the three matching schemas, i.e., query-code, query-comment,
and code-code.
   Inspired by these findings, we propose CodeBridge, a zero-shot, fine-tuning-free approach for
cross-domain code search that integrates the three matching schemas. Query-comment matching
and code-code matching assume the existence of code comments and code snippet examples,
respectively. However, in practical applications, code comments are often absent and there are
no feasible code snippet examples for real-time queries, hindering the use of the two matching
schemas. Inspired by the recent advancements of LLMs in zero-shot code summarization and code
generation [Achiam et al. 2023; Li et al. 2023; Luo et al. 2023; Roziere et al. 2023], we propose
leveraging LLMs to deal with these obstacles. Specifically, we first employ zero-shot prompting to
guide LLMs in generating a comment for each code snippet in the codebase and producing a code
for each query. Subsequently, we transform queries, code snippets, comments, and the generated
code into embeddings using PLMs and assess vector similarities through three matching schemas,
i.e., query-code, query-comment, and generated code-code. Lastly, we present a sampling-based
fusion approach that combines the three similarity scores to rank the final results.
   To evaluate CodeBridge, we further investigate the following research questions:
      • RQ4: How does CodeBridge perform?
      • RQ5: How effective is our fusion strategy?
      • RQ6: How sensitive is CodeBridge to its components and hyper-parameters?
Experimental results show that in the zero-shot setting, our approach outperforms the state-of-the-
art PLM-based code search approaches, i.e., CoCoSoDa [Shi et al. 2023a] and UniXcoder [Guo et al.
2022], by an average of 21.4% and 24.9% in MRR, respectively, across three datasets of different

                                  Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:4                                 Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


domains. Moreover, our fine-tuning-free method can yield results better than or comparable to
those of RAPID [Fan et al. 2024], which necessitates fine-tuning for each domain. Further analysis
demonstrates the effectiveness of our fusion strategy within our approach and reveals that our
approach is effective across various retrieval models, weight selections, and LLMs.
  In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
      • We empirically investigate the effectiveness of query-comment matching and code-code
        matching in zero-shot cross-domain code search. Our analysis highlights, for the first time,
        the high complementarity of the query-code, query-comment, and code-code matching
        schemas, which can be utilized to mitigate domain gaps.
      • We propose a novel fine-tuning-free approach for zero-shot cross-domain code search. Our
        approach is easy to implement and establishes a strong baseline for zero-shot cross-domain
        code search.
      • We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on zero-shot
        cross-domain code search. Our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art PLM-based code
        search approaches and achieves performance that is better than or comparable to existing
        methods for zero-shot cross-domain code search that necessitate fine-tuning.

2     Background and Related Work
2.1    Code Search
2.1.1 Problem Formulation. The code search task aims to retrieve relevant code snippets from a
codebase containing a set of code snippets {𝑐 1, 𝑐 2, ..., 𝑐𝑛 } for a natural language query 𝑞. This is
accomplished by ranking the code snippets based on their computed similarity scores {𝑠 1, 𝑠 2, ..., 𝑠𝑛 },
where each score 𝑠𝑖 = 𝑓 (𝑞, 𝑐𝑖 ) reflects the relevance of code snippet 𝑐𝑖 to query 𝑞. The system then
returns the top-𝑘 code snippets as results.
   In IR-based methods, 𝑓 is commonly a text-matching function. In deep learning (DL)-based
methods, a model first transforms 𝑞 and 𝑐𝑖 into vectors 𝑣𝑞 and 𝑣𝑐𝑖 . The function 𝑓 usually computes
the cosine similarity between 𝑣𝑞 and 𝑣𝑐𝑖 . The model performing this task is called a retriever.

2.1.2 Code Search Methods. Code search methods can be categorized into two groups: IR-based
methods and DL-based methods. IR-based methods rely on text-matching algorithms to retrieve
relevant code snippets but struggle to capture deep semantic meaning. In contrast, DL-based
methods, which utilize neural networks to learn query-code correlations in large-scale datasets,
have become increasingly popular in recent years. For example, DeepCS [Gu et al. 2018] uses
recurrent neural networks to embed queries and code in a shared vector space.
   Recently, pre-trained models have demonstrated superior performance compared to traditional
DL-based methods [Feng et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2022, 2020; Wang et al. 2021b]. Pre-trained models
first learn extensive code knowledge from large-scale code repositories and are then fine-tuned on
domain-specific query-code pairs. To this end, many pre-trained code models have been proposed.
[Feng et al. 2020] introduce CodeBERT, which is the first pre-trained model specifically designed
for code. [Guo et al. 2022] propose UniXcoder, a unified cross-modal pre-trained model for both
code-related understanding tasks and generation tasks. [Shi et al. 2023a] propose CoCoSoDa, which
utilizes soft data augmentation and multimodal momentum contrastive learning to align query-code
pairs, achieving state-of-the-art results on the CodeSearchNet [Husain et al. 2019] benchmark.
   Our proposed approach is also built upon PLMs. However, in contrast to the work mentioned
above, this work focuses on zero-shot cross-domain code search. In addition, our proposed approach
can leverage existing models without modifying their internal structure or parameters and thus is
complementary instead of competing with existing PLM-based methods.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                       FSE087:5


2.2    Cross-Domain Code Search
Cross-domain code search refers to retrieving relevant code snippets from a target domain when
the initial training data comes from different domains. IR-based methods [Lv et al. 2015; Zhang
et al. 2021] utilizing unsupervised text matching algorithms can naturally handle this situation.
However, they struggle to capture deep semantics. DL-based methods are more effective, but
adapting DL-based methods to a new domain is challenging without sufficient labeled data. Existing
methods that tackle this challenge can be divided into three categories:
   Pre-training uses large-scale unlabeled data and self-supervised objectives to train neural models.
The trained model can learn common knowledge from the data and be adapted to different domains.
For example, [Guo et al. 2020] introduces edge prediction and node alignment as pre-training
objectives to leverage data flow information. UniXcoder [Guo et al. 2022] employs a denoising
objective and incorporates abstract syntax tree information in pre-training.
   Meta learning uses multiple tasks to help models adapt to new domains with very few labeled
data [Finn et al. 2017]. In code search, [Chai et al. 2022] apply Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning to
improve model parameter initialization. [Pian et al. 2023] introduce MetaTPTrans, which learns
language-agnostic information from multilingual source code.
   Pseudo-labeling refers to generating labels for unlabeled data with existing generators and then
training the model with the synthesized data. Pseudo-labeling has been widely used in the field
of natural language processing (NLP) [Ma et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021a]. [Fan et al. 2024] are the
only ones to apply pseudo-labeling to tackle the zero-shot cross-domain code search task. They
utilize pre-trained models to generate synthetic data and introduce a mixture sampling strategy to
mitigate noise. RAPID exhibits outstanding performance that surpasses all baseline models.
   Unlike the methods mentioned above, our approach demands no training and requires no
modification of model parameters.

2.3    Large Language Models
Recently, LLMs have demonstrated impressive zero-shot capabilities in diverse code-related tasks
including code generation and code summarization [Achiam et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2024; Luo
et al. 2023; Nijkamp et al. 2022; Roziere et al. 2023]. Code generation refers to generating a code
for a given natural language description. In recent years, LLMs designed for coding tasks, such
as CodeGen [Nijkamp et al. 2022], Code Llama [Roziere et al. 2023] and DeepSeek-Coder [Guo
et al. 2024], have achieved remarkable results in code generation. Code summarization refers to
generating a summary in natural language for a given code. Many works [Geng et al. 2024; Sun
et al. 2023] have demonstrated the effectiveness of LLMs in code summarization.
   In this work, we directly utilize LLMs’ zero-shot capabilities to generate code and comments for
cross-domain code search. The methods mentioned above can potentially be used in our approach.

3     Empirical Study Setup
We conduct an empirical study to investigate the feasibility of leveraging query-comment matching
and code-code matching to mitigate domain gaps. In this section, we will introduce the experimental
setup of our empirical study.

3.1    Dataset
This work focuses on cross-domain code search scenarios. Thus, we use the Solidity dataset [Chai
et al. 2022], which is commonly employed as a benchmark for the cross-domain code search
task [Chai et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2024]. Solidity is a language designed for smart contracts [Wohrer
and Zdun 2018] and is not included in the pre-trained data of the PLMs we use. We follow the data

                                  Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:6                                 Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


split of prior work [Chai et al. 2022], where the training, validation, and test sets consist of 56,976,
4,096, and 1,000 samples, respectively. We exclusively use the test set from the Solidity dataset,
which consists of 1,000 test queries and their corresponding 1,000 Solidity functions.

3.2    Research Questions
Our study is structured around the following research questions (RQs):
   RQ1: How effective is query-comment matching compared to query-code matching?
Our objective is to investigate the effectiveness of query-comment matching and the relationship
between query-comment matching and query-code matching. To answer RQ1, we first compare the
performance of query-comment matching with query-code matching. For the query-code matching
schema, we calculate the similarity between the query and the code and then order the code based
on the similarity scores. For the query-comment matching schema, since the original comments of
code are used as queries, we first use zero-shot prompting to guide LLMs in generating a comment
for each code. Then we order the code based on similarity scores between the query and comments
related to the code. We then identify the differences between the retrieval results obtained from
these two search methods to determine if they complement each other. Finally, we analyze the
specific scenarios in which the query-comment matching method performs better.
   RQ2: How effective is code-code matching compared to query-code matching? Similar to
RQ1, we first compare the performance of code-code matching with query-code matching. For the
query-code matching schema, the retrieval process is identical to that described in RQ1. For the
code-code matching schema, because there are no code snippets labeled as matching the test queries
in either the training set or validation set, we also leverage LLMs to generate a code snippet for
each query. During the retrieval process, we rank the code based on the similarity scores between
the code and the generated code. We then also analyze the differences between the retrieval results
from the two search methods and the specific scenarios where code-code matching performs better.
   RQ3: Can the three matching schemas complement each other? Considering the comple-
mentarity between the query-code and query-comment schemas, as well as between the query-code
and code-code schemas, we would like to investigate whether these three schemas can complement
each another, and how their relationships can be leveraged for zero-shot code search. To address
this RQ, We further analyze the retrieval results from the three matching schemas and the outcome
of integrating these three schemas.

3.3    Evaluation Metrics
We follow previous studies [Chai et al. 2022; Cheng and Kuang 2022; Fan et al. 2024] and utilize two
widely adopted metrics, MRR (Mean Reciprocal Rank) and top-𝑘 accuracy (𝑘 = 1, 5, 10), to evaluate
the performance of code search approaches. MRR is the average of the reciprocal ranks of correct
answers for a set of queries. Top-𝑘 accuracy is the proportion of queries for which relevant code
can be found among the top 𝑘 results.

3.4    Implementation Details
As UniXcoder [Guo et al. 2022] has achieved remarkable results and is widely used as a backbone
model in code search [Shi et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2023a,b], we utilize UniXcoder as the retriever to
perform zero-shot code search. Following previous studies [Fan et al. 2024; Feng et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2023c], we set the maximum sequence length of the retriever’s input to 256 for programming
language (PL) and 128 for natural language (NL), respectively. Considering both effectiveness and
efficiency, we utilize DeepSeek-Coder-1.3B-Instruct for zero-shot code and comment generation due
to its impressive performance and the relatively small number of parameters. We set the maximum
generation length of the LLM to 256 for PL and 128 for NL.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                                                                          FSE087:7


4     Empirical Results
4.1     RQ1: How effective is query-comment matching compared to query-code matching?

                          Table 1. Performance on Solidity with Different Matching Schemas

                          Schema                         MRR                   Top-1            Top-5                    Top-10
                       Query-Code                        0.544                 0.452            0.651                     0.701
                      Query-Comment                      0.500                 0.409            0.605                     0.681
                        Code-Code                        0.410                 0.330            0.492                     0.566


  The results are shown in Table 1. The results demonstrate that query-comment matching is not
superior to query-code matching. However, the MRR and accuracy of the query-comment approach
are close to the query-code approach, suggesting promising potential for query-comment matching.

                                                                                                                           Top-1
                      Top-1                                                                             Query-Code                              Query-Comment
                                                                          Top-1

                                                                                                              68                     117
                                                                                                                                                  67

             130          322         87                                                                                       205
                                                                  185         267         63
                                                                                                                   62
                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                          43
                                Query-Comment                                       Code-Code
             Query-Code                                          Query-Code                                             Code-Code



      (a) Query-Code vs. Query-Comment                  (b) Query-Code vs. Code-Code                    (c) Three matching types

    Fig. 1. The Venn diagram of the top-1 retrieved samples using UniXcoder based on the Solidity test set.

  Fig. 1a presents the Venn diagram of the cases where the first code snippet retrieved by the query-
code approach or the query-comment approach is correct. The result shows that the query-comment
approach successfully retrieves 87 samples that cannot be correctly handled by the query-code
approach, accounting for 19.2% of the top-1 retrieved samples of the query-comment approach.
This indicates that the two approaches are complementary.

                                                     Table 2. Proportions of categories

         Outperforming Pattern             #Samples                             Category                                                           Proportion
                                                           Comments mask domain-specific implementation details                                      62.0%
           Query-Comment                        87
                                                                  Comments mask unnecessary details                                                  38.0%
                                                                         Direct token matching                                                       28.6%
              Code-Code                         63
                                                                     Operation sequence matching                                                     71.4%


   We analyze the 87 samples that are successfully handled by query-comment matching but not
by query-code matching. We observe that when the discrepancy between the query and the code is
significant, and the comment effectively summarizes the function’s purpose while aligning closely
with the query’s intent, query-comment matching outperforms query-code matching. We further
analyze the potential reasons for the better performance of query-comment matching on these
samples. We find that in contrast to query-code matching, which requires mapping knowledge
between the query and the code, the comment masks the implementation details in the code and
aligns with the query at the same level of abstraction. This makes the matching process more
straightforward. We classify these potential reasons into two categories, with their respective
proportions outlined in Table 2 and illustrative examples provided in Fig. 2:

                                                 Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:8                                        Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


    Case 1:                                                        Case 2:
    Query: checks if the address already invested                  Query: sets time lock for given allocation address
                                                                   Code:
                                                                     contract c12429 {
                                                                       function setInitialAllocationTimelock(
    Code:                                                                 address allocationAddress,uint32 timelockTillDate)
     contract c39716 {                                                    external onlyController returns(bool) {
       function isInvestor(address who) returns(bool) {                  require(allocationAddress != address(0));
         for (uint i = 0; i < investors.length; i++)                     require(timelockTillDate >= now);
           if (investors[i] == who) return true;                         timelockedAddresses[allocationAddress] = timelockTillDate;
         return false;
                                                                         emit InitiallAllocationTimelocked(
       }
     }                                                                       allocationAddress, timelockTillDate);
                                                                         return true;
                                                                       }
                                                                     }
     Comment:This Solidity contract is designed to manage a list   Comment: This Solidity contract is designed to manage the allocation of
     of investors. The `isInvestor` function checks if a given     funds to different addresses with a timelock. The
     address is an investor in the contract.                       `setInitialAllocationTimelock` function allows the controller to set an
                                                                   address and a timelock period for that address. The timelock period is in
                                                                   seconds and is set to expire after the current time.



Fig. 2. Cases where query-comment method outperforms query-code method in Solidity’s test dataset. The
code is the ground truth code for the given query. The comment is generated by LLMs.



   (1) Comments mask domain-specific implementation details. In Case 1 illustrated in Fig. 2, the
query-code matching model faces challenges in correlating the query “checks if the address already
invested” with specific details such as the variable type address, the concept of investors, and the
equality comparison investors[i] == who of type address. However, the comment abstracts these
details and clearly states the function’s intent, thereby simplifying the comparison process.
   (2) Comments mask unnecessary details. In Case 2 depicted in Fig. 2, the target code matches the
query “sets time lock for given allocation address”. However, the code also involves additional steps
like validating the address, which are not directly relevant to the primary action described by the
query. Such extra details can introduce noise when aligning queries with code. In contrast, comments
concisely summarize the core functionality, reducing noise and enabling accurate matching.
   By analyzing the 130 samples handled successfully by query-code matching but not query-
comment matching, we observe two failure causes for query-comment matching, i.e., (1) imprecise
comments and (2) excessive noise. Imprecise comments hinder the alignment between queries and
comments. For example, a comment describes the code as a “CryptoKitties-like game token contract”
while omitting its key function of initiating contributions. This naturally leads to a mismatch with
the query “Start Contribute”. Meanwhile, excessive noise drowns out key information, weakening
the match. For example, a comment accurately describes the target function “is used to add a new
owner to the contract” but also includes extraneous details, such as the usage of modifiers. This
additional information weakens the match between “add a new owner” and the query “Adds an
owner”. These findings highlight that only relying on query-comment matching is not enough for
accurate code search.

 Answer to RQ1: When used individually, query-comment matching does not outperform query-
 code matching. However, they are complementary. Further analysis suggests that query-comment
 matching can perform better than query-code matching in certain scenarios. This may be because
 comments often omit domain-specific and/or unnecessary details in the code, reducing the need
 for domain-specific query-code mapping knowledge. Query-comment matching might fail when
 comments are imprecise or contain excessive noise.



Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                                       FSE087:9


4.2    RQ2: How effective is code-code matching compared to query-code matching?
The experimental results are shown in Table 1. The results demonstrate that code-code matching is
also not superior to query-code matching. Fig. 1b presents the Venn diagram of the cases where
the first code snippet retrieved by the query-code approach or the code-code approach is correct.
The result shows that the code-code matching successfully retrieves 63 samples that cannot be
correctly handled by the query-code approach, accounting for 13.9% of the top-1 retrieved samples
of the query-code approach. This also indicates that the two approaches are complementary.


      Case 1:                                                  Case 2:
      Query: Deposits tokens in game to some user              Query: Allows the pendingOwner address to finalize the
      Code:                                                    transfer, as long as it is called within the specified start and
       contract c10549 {                                       end time
         function sendTo(address _user, uint64 _amount)
                                                               Code:
             external {
                                                                 contract c20691 {
           require(
                                                                   function claimOwnership()
               walletBalances[msg.sender] >= _amount);
                                                                       onlyPendingOwner public {
           walletBalances[msg.sender] -= _amount;
                                                                     require((block.number <= end)
           if (userIds[_user] > 0) {
                                                                         && (block.number >= start));
             balances[userIds[_user]] += _amount;
                                                                     OwnershipTransferred(owner, pendingOwner);
           } else {
                                                                     owner = pendingOwner;
             walletBalances[_user] += _amount;
                                                                     pendingOwner = address(0);
           }
                                                                     end = 0;
           emit Deposit(_user, _amount);
         }                                                         }
                                                                 }
       }

      Generated Code:                                          Generated Code:
        contract TokenDeposit {                                  contract PendingOwner {
          address public owner;                                    function finalizeTransfer() public {
          mapping(address = > uint256) public balances;              require(now >= startTime && now <= endTime,
          event Deposit(                                                 "Transfer not within time range");
              address indexed user, uint256 amount);                 pendingOwner = address(0);
          function deposit() public payable {                      }
            require(msg.value > 0,                               }
                "Deposit amount must be greater than "
                + "zero");
            balances[msg.sender] += msg.value;
            emit Deposit(msg.sender, msg.value);
          }
        }




Fig. 3. Cases where code-code method outperforms query-code method in Solidity’s test dataset. The code
represents the correct code for the query, while the generated code denotes the code generated by LLM for
the same query.

   Similar to RQ1, we analyze the 63 samples that are successfully handled by the code-code
matching but not by the query-code matching. We find that in these cases, the generated code
shares a similar implementation to the target code. The reason why code-code matching outperforms
query-code matching in these samples may be attributed to the fact that the two code snippets
operate within the same abstract level. Specifically, code deals with low-level operations, and
directly comparing these low-level implementations can help reduce the need for domain-specific
query-code mapping knowledge. We classify these potential reasons into two categories, with their
respective proportions outlined in Table 2 and illustrative examples provided in Fig. 3:
   (1) In case 1 illustrated in Fig. 3, both the generated code and the target code start a deposit by
using “emit Deposit”, a specific syntax in Solidity. Such direct match reduces the difficulty for the
model to identify the relevant answer. In contrast, the query-code matching schema fails in this
case because the operation of depositing tokens is relatively rare in other programming languages
like Python and understanding how to deposit tokens can be difficult without domain-specific

                                        Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:10                                Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


knowledge. This case indicates that the implementation similarities between the generated code
and the target code can facilitate a more direct match and reduce the difficulties in cross-domain
code search.
   (2) In case 2 illustrated in Figure 3, both the generated code and the target code implement
time constraints by using require statement and a mechanism to finalize the ownership transfer
in the same order. The model can identify the comparable operation sequences directly without
first learning the code’s structure for a domain-specific query. However, the query-code matching
schema fails in this case because the specific implementation order of operations for finalizing
a transfer is difficult to determine without domain-specific knowledge. This case indicates that
structure similarities between the generated code and the target code can also help reduce the need
for domain-specific knowledge.
   We analyze the 185 samples successfully handled by query-code matching but not by code-code
matching. We identify two failure causes for code-code matching: (1) imprecise generated code and
(2) differing implementations. Imprecise code often leads to mismatches. For example, the generated
code that simply returns a byte32 variable naturally fails to match the query “Extract 256-bit worth
of data from the bytes stream”. Differing implementations also hinder code-code matching. For
example, for the query “create a new offer with setting”, the generated code uses a struct Offer with
an initialization method, while the target code uses an internal function CreateOffer_internal. This
implementation mismatch prevents successful code-code matching.
   Results in Table 1 show that code-code matching underperforms compared to query-comment
matching. This may be due to the diversity of code: developers use varying identifiers, and im-
plementations differ in abstraction levels, such as low-level instructions versus high-level library
functions. These factors make code-code matching harder than simpler query-comment matching.

 Answer to RQ2: When used individually, code-code matching does not surpass query-code
 matching in performance. However, the two schemas are also complementary. Further analysis
 indicates that code-code matching might outperform query-code matching in certain scenarios.
 The main reason is that code-code matching focuses on the same low-level operations, which
 reduces the need for domain-specific knowledge to map queries to code. Code-code matching
 might fail when the generated code is imprecise or using a different implementation.


4.3    RQ3: Can the three matching schemas complement each other?
The three matching schemas each have distinct advantages. Query-comment matching simplifies
the matching process by masking implementation details. Code-code matching compares low-level
implementations in the code, reducing the need for domain-specific knowledge. We further analyze
the advantages of query-code matching by examining: (1) 130 samples successfully handled by
query-code matching but not by query-comment matching; (2) 185 samples successfully handled
by query-code matching but not by code-code matching. We also identify two specific scenarios
where query-code matching outperforms the other matching schemas:
   (1) Direct function name matching: Docstring-code pairs, where function names usually align
with docstrings, are used to train code search models like CoCoSoDa. Thus, query-code matching
effectively identifies relevant code snippets when the query directly matches a function name.
   (2) Function specification matching: Query-code matching performs better when the query
includes function specifications (e.g., return types, input parameters), which can be directly mapped
to the code implementation for accurate matching.
   Fig. 1c presents the Venn diagram of samples from the three matching schemas where the correct
code is successfully ranked first. The three matching schemas exhibit high complementarity. The

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                                                              FSE087:11


query-comment matching schema retrieves 67 samples not found in the query-code and code-code
retrieval samples. Meanwhile, the code-code matching schema retrieves 43 samples that are not
included in the set of query-code and query-comment retrieval samples. By combining the top-1
retrieval samples from the three matching schemas, an additional 130 samples can be retrieved
at the top rank, constituting 28.8% of the top-1 retrieval samples from the query-code matching
schema. This underscores the significant potential of integrating these three matching schemas to
enhance code search performance.

    Answer to RQ3: The three matching schemas are complementary. Combining retrieval results
    of three matching approaches can yield a significant 28.8% enhancement in top-1 accuracy over
    query-to-code matching alone.


5     Approach of CodeBridge
The results of our empirical study show that query-comment matching can hide domain-specific
and unnecessary details in the code, thereby enabling matching at a similar level of abstraction.
Meanwhile, code-code matching facilitates a direct comparison of the concrete implementation
details, thus focusing the matching on lower-level operations. Each method provides distinct
advantages in specific cross-domain scenarios and can serve as a complement to query-code
matching. Inspired by these findings, we propose a novel method named CodeBridge to bridge
domain gaps for cross-domain code search by integrating the three matching schemas.

        (a) Zero-Shot Generation                      (b) Hybrid Retrieval                                         (c) Score Aggregation

                                                             Query
                                                                                                        0.350

                                                                                                                               0.123,
                            LLM                              Code
               Query               Generated Code                                                                              0.432,
                                                                                                        0.678                    ...
          Codebase                                                                                                             0.892,
                                                           Comment                                                   Fusion    0.456
                                                                                                                                Fusion     Ranked
                                                                                                        0.752
                                                        Generated Code                                                          Scores      Code
                            LLM
               Code                  Comment                                 Embedding                Similarity
                                                                                         Embeddings
                                                                               Model                    Scores



                                                Fig. 4. Overall Framework of CodeBridge

   Fig. 4 shows the overall framework of CodeBridge. CodeBridge is composed of three components:
zero-shot generation, hybrid retrieval, and score aggregation. (1) In the zero-shot generation
stage, queries are translated into code snippets, and conversely, code is translated into descriptive
comments. As comments are often missing in practical applications, and the code snippets that
satisfy real-time queries are also unknown during runtime, we use zero-shot prompting to guide
LLMs in generating code and creating code summaries. (2) In the hybrid retrieval stage, all entities,
including queries, code, comments, and generated code, are transformed into vector representations
through embedding models. We then calculate the similarity scores for each matching pair. (3) In
the score aggregation stage, we combine the scores and rank them to determine the final result. We
propose a sampling-based fusion strategy to aggregate the scores.

5.1     Zero-Shot Generation
In this stage, we use zero-shot prompting to guide LLMs in generating comments and code. We
design prompts, as presented in Table 3, for code summarization and code generation. For code
summarization, we take inspiration from [Sun et al. 2023] to create our prompts. As shown in

                                                    Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:12                                Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


Table 3, we include details about the programming language to help the LLM understand and tap
into relevant expertise. Also, we take out the phrase “in one sentence” that is used in Sun et al.’s
study [Sun et al. 2023] to make the summaries richer and more informative. For code generation,
we request the LLMs to generate code in a specific language and ensure that it provides an answer.

                        Table 3. Prompts for Code Summarization and Code Generation

             Task                                                   Prompt
                         Below is a {language} code that describes a task. Please give a short summary describing
      Code Summarization the purpose of the code. You must write only summary without any prefix or suffix
                         explanations. \n {code}
                            Write a code for the following query in {language} without comments. You must return a
       Code Generation
                            code and must not refuse to answer. \n {query}



5.2    Hybrid Retrieval
In this stage, we calculate similarity scores in three matching schemas. After zero-shot generation,
the initial query-code pair, denoted as ⟨𝑞, 𝑐⟩ where 𝑞 represents the query and 𝑐 the source code, is
expanded to ⟨𝑞, 𝑐, 𝑚, 𝑔⟩. Here, 𝑚 represents the comment associated with the code 𝑐, and 𝑔 represents
the code generated from the query 𝑞. The three matching schemas are defined as follows:
    • Query-Code Matching (⟨𝑞, 𝑐⟩): Direct comparison of the query against the source code.
    • Query-Comment Matching (⟨𝑞, 𝑚⟩): Comparison at an abstract level between the query
       and the descriptive comment.
    • Code-Code Matching (⟨𝑐, 𝑔⟩): Evaluating the implementation consistency between the
       generated code snippet (𝑔) and the original code (𝑐).
Let 𝜙 (𝑥, 𝑦) denote the similarity scoring function, where 𝑥 and 𝑦 represent the elements being
compared. We first encode input into vectors using a PLM, denoted as M. Then we calculate the
similarity between vectors. We use cosine similarity by default. The formulas are as follows.
                         𝑣 𝑥 = M (𝑥),      𝑣 𝑦 = M (𝑦),      𝜙 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑠𝑖𝑚(M (𝑥), M (𝑦))                            (1)
   For each expanded ⟨𝑞, 𝑐, 𝑚, 𝑔⟩ tuple, the similarity scores are computed as follows:
                             𝑠𝑞𝑐 = 𝜙𝑞𝑐 (𝑞, 𝑐),     𝑠𝑞𝑚 = 𝜙𝑞𝑚 (𝑞, 𝑚),       𝑠𝑐𝑔 = 𝜙𝑐𝑔 (𝑐, 𝑔)                          (2)
where 𝑠 type represents the similarity score for the corresponding type of matching schema.

5.3    Score Aggregation
In this stage, we aim to aggregate the three similarity scores and rank the code snippets to obtain the
final result. The most straightforward method for combining different retrieval outputs is a linear
combination. However, the assignment of weights is influenced by two key aspects: the comparative
matching ability of different models and the varying quality of both generated comments and
synthesized code. This interplay introduces complexity in determining the ideal weights.
   To obtain an appropriate weight configuration for a specific ensemble of models, we propose a
sampling-based linear combination method. Consider the equation for computing the final score:
                                        𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝛼 × 𝑠𝑞𝑐 + 𝛽 × 𝑠𝑞𝑚 + 𝛾 × 𝑠𝑐𝑔                                         (3)
To determine suitable values for 𝛼, 𝛽, and 𝛾, we first randomly select 1,000 instances from the
training set of CodeSearchNet-Java [Husain et al. 2019], a widely-used dataset for code search,
to serve as the validation set. These instances are all in Java, a language not represented in our

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                     FSE087:13


evaluation datasets. We then use grid search with a 0.05 step size to explore the full range of potential
weight combinations. The configuration yielding the maximum top-10 accuracy is adopted.

6     Evaluation Settings
We conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate the performance of CodeBridge. In this section,
we first introduce the research questions. Then we describe the datasets, baselines, evaluation
metrics, and implementation details.

6.1    Research Questions
We systematically evaluate the effectiveness (RQ4 and RQ5) of CodeBridge and analyze its sensitivity
to its components and hyper-parameters (RQ6).
   RQ4: How does CodeBridge perform? We evaluate CodeBridge across three datasets of
different domains against various code search methods, including the state-of-the-art PLM-based
code search approaches such as UniXcoder [Guo et al. 2022] and CoCoSoDa [Shi et al. 2023a], as
well as the state-of-the-art zero-shot cross-domain code search method, RAPID [Fan et al. 2024]. As
LLMs might directly serve as in-domain code search tools, we implement zero-shot LLM embedding
methods for code search and evaluate their performance against CodeBridge. Additionally, we
perform an ablation study to evaluate the effectiveness of combining three matching schemas.
   RQ5: How effective is our fusion strategy? Existing fusion strategies can be divided into two
groups: score-based (e.g., CombSUM [Fox and Shaw 1994] and CombMNZ [Fox and Shaw 1994])
and rank-based (e.g., Borda [Borda 1784], RRF [Cormack et al. 2009]). We compare our strategy
with four widely-used fusion strategies [Benham and Culpepper 2017] on the Solidity test set.
   RQ6: How sensitive is CodeBridge to its components and hyper-parameters? To analyze
the sensitivity of CodeBridge, we conduct experiments on CodeBridge with different retrieval
models, weight selections, and LLMs:
   (1) Different retrieval models: we evaluate our framework with different retrieval models and
their combinations on three datasets.
   (2) Different weight selections: We investigate the effects of varying weights in Eq. (3) and the
impact of the sampling dataset. First, we utilize the Solidity dataset to systematically explore the
performance of all possible weight configurations under the constraint that 𝛼 + 𝛽 + 𝛾 = 1, using a
step size of 0.01. We present the findings through visual representations. Second, we obtain weights
from datasets of three other widely used languages in CodeSearchNet [Husain et al. 2019]. Then,
we analyze the impact of the sampling dataset.
   (3) Different LLMs: We use various LLMs to perform zero-shot generation and test our approach
on the Solidity dataset.

6.2    Datasets
Following previous work [Fan et al. 2024], we conduct experiments on three datasets: SQL [Chai
et al. 2022], Solidity [Chai et al. 2022] and CoSQA [Huang et al. 2021]. Each dataset includes a set
of test queries and a codebase. The SQL dataset and Solidity dataset contain code examples written
in SQL and Solidity, respectively. These languages are not part of the training dataset for the PLMs
we use. Instead of using code comments as queries, the CoSQA dataset includes real queries from
Microsoft Bing [Bing 2024] and corresponding Python code snippets from Github [Github 2024].
   The statistics of the three datasets are shown in Table 4. Recognizing that code comments are
often missing or insufficient in practice, we remove all code comments in the code. Besides, we
utilize real web queries as test queries within the CoSQA dataset following the initial setting of
[Huang et al. 2021]. Please note that the dataset configuration of RAPID, the state-of-the-art zero-
shot cross-domain code search approach, is different. They do not fully remove code comments,

                                  Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:14                                Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


and they use code comments as test queries in the CoSQA dataset. Additionally, RAPID applies a
custom split to the CoSQA dataset, resulting in different dataset sizes. The CoSQA dataset consists
of 20,604 queries and 6,267 code snippets, where each code snippet is accompanied by a comment.
RAPID constructs three subsets: 20,000 code-only samples for training (including repeated code
snippets), 602 comment-code pairs for validation, and 901 comment-code pairs for testing. RAPID
generates comments for each code snippet in the training set to create the final comment-code
pairs for training. To ensure a fair comparison, when comparing our approach to RAPID, we use
the dataset configuration of RAPID. Importantly, the difference in dataset sizes does not affect the
validity of our results, as we only compare CodeBridge and the baselines under the same setting,
never cross settings.
                                         Table 4. Statistics of the Datasets

                    Setting             Language Train Valid Test Codebase w/ Comment Use Web Query
                                          SQL     14,000 2,068 1,000      1,000        no         /
            Cross-Domain Setting         Solidity 56,976 4,096 1,000      1,000        no         /
                                         CoSQA 19,604 500 500             6,267        no        yes
                                          SQL     14,000 2,068 1,000      1,000        no         /
               RAPID’s Setting           Solidity 56,976 4,096 1,000      1,000        yes        /
                                         CoSQA 20,000 602         901      901         no         no

6.3    Baselines
To comprehensively evaluate the performance of our approach, we broadly select traditional IR-
based models, pre-trained models, zero-shot cross-domain code search methods, and zero-shot
LLM embedding methods as baselines:
   IR-based Models: BM25 [Robertson et al. 2009] is an enhanced text-matching algorithm
based on TF-IDF, serving as a strong baseline for unsupervised code search.
   Pre-trained Models: GraphCodeBERT [Guo et al. 2020] is a code pre-trained model that
leverages control flow graph information during pre-training; CodeT5+ 110M [Wang et al. 2023c]
incorporates tasks such as causal language modeling and text-code contrastive learning to improve
embedding quality; UnixCoder [Guo et al. 2022] is trained using ASTs (Abstract Syntax Trees)
and code comment data, enhancing its code understanding ability. CoCoSoDa [Shi et al. 2023a]
applies multimodal momentum contrastive learning and soft data augmentation to enhance code
and query representations. It achieves state-of-the-art performance on the CodeSearchNet dataset.
   Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Methods: RAPID [Fan et al. 2024] uses a pre-trained generative
model to generate queries for each code snippet and then fine-tunes the retrieval model using these
synthesized query-code pairs. This approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in the scenario
of zero-shot cross-domain code search.
   Zero-Shot LLM Embedding Methods: Weighted Mean Pooling [Muennighoff 2022]
computes the positional weighted average of token embeddings; Mean Pooling [Reimers 2019]
computes the average of token embeddings; EOS Pooling[Reimers 2019] uses the last token’s
embedding; Echo Embedding [Springer et al. 2024] is the state-of-the-art zero-shot embedding
method for LLMs, which repeats the input twice for richer contextual embeddings.

6.4    Evaluation Metrics and Implementation Details
We follow previous RQs and utilize MRR and top-𝑘 accuracy (𝑘 = 1, 5, 10) as the evaluation metrics.
  We employ the most advanced models tailored for each type of matching schema in our approach.
Specifically, we employ CoCoSoDa for query-code, BGE [Xiao et al. 2024] for query-comment, and
UniXcoder for code-code matching. BGE is a superior natural language vector model trained on 300

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                            FSE087:15


million pairs of natural language texts, demonstrating powerful natural language representation
capabilities. Specifically, we utilize the bge-large-en-v1.5 (326M). The weights in Eq. (3) of this
particular model configuration are 𝛼 = 0.65, 𝛽 = 0.25, 𝛾 = 0.10. We set the maximum sequence
length of the retriever’s input to 256 for PL and 128 for NL, respectively.
   We use DeepSeek-Coder-1.3B-Instruct for zero-shot generation and set the maximum generation
length to 256 for PL and 128 for NL. For RAPID, we directly copy its results from its original
paper [Fan et al. 2024]. For PLM-based methods, we use their official implementation. As IR-
based methods are sensitive to pre-possessing methods, we follow [Zhang et al. 2021] for BM25
preprocessing steps. We apply LLM embedding methods directly to DeepSeek-Coder-1.3B-Instruct,
generating query and code embeddings for code search.

7     Evaluation Results
7.1    RQ4: How does CodeBridge perform?
The experimental results are shown in Table 5 and Table 6, which demonstrate CodeBridge’s
effectiveness in all the evaluated languages and settings.

                          Table 5. Comparison with Baselines on Cross-domain Setting

                                  SQL                             Solidity                           CoSQA
      Model
                  MRR       Top-1    Top-5    Top-10   MRR     Top-1    Top-5   Top-10   MRR     Top-1   Top-5      Top-10
      BM25        0.469     0.341     0.614    0.725   0.475   0.391    0.565    0.624   0.183   0.110   0.254       0.312
 GraphCodeBERT    0.177     0.120     0.215    0.286   0.196   0.135    0.249    0.310   0.089   0.040   0.130       0.190
  CodeT5+ 110M    0.512     0.385     0.662    0.758   0.424   0.339    0.508    0.579   0.407   0.260   0.586       0.678
    UniXcoder     0.744     0.632     0.887    0.938   0.544   0.452    0.651    0.701   0.376   0.256   0.512       0.620
    CoCoSoDa      0.555     0.441     0.690    0.769   0.625   0.541    0.728    0.788   0.482   0.346   0.630       0.724
 Weighted Mean    0.115     0.077     0.138    0.180   0.051   0.027    0.060    0.082   0.007    0.0    0.008       0.016
     Pooling
  Mean Pooling    0.092     0.054    0.113    0.156    0.048   0.019   0.064    0.088    0.006    0.002   0.004      0.008
   EOS Pooling    0.006     0.002    0.002    0.005    0.007   0.001   0.003    0.008    0.004    0.002   0.002      0.008
 Echo Embedding   0.064     0.044    0.077    0.092    0.059   0.037   0.070    0.093    0.046    0.024   0.058      0.088
   Query-Code     0.555     0.441    0.690    0.769    0.625   0.541   0.728    0.788    0.482    0.346   0.630      0.724
 Query-Comment    0.744     0.644    0.873    0.927    0.554   0.460   0.661    0.735    0.454    0.322   0.604      0.728
    Code-Code     0.697     0.602    0.817    0.875    0.410   0.330   0.492    0.566    0.303    0.200   0.406      0.522
   CodeBridge     0.811     0.723    0.929    0.958    0.658   0.571   0.762    0.833    0.544    0.424   0.682      0.782


   According to Table 5, CodeBridge surpasses CoCoSoDa by an average of 21.4% in MRR and 30.6%
in top-1 accuracy. Additionally, our approach outperforms UniXcoder with an average improvement
of 24.9% in MRR and 35.4% in top-1 accuracy. While CoCoSoDa performs well across most languages,
it doesn’t work as effectively on SQL dataset, which indicates its limitation on generalization to
different domains. Meanwhile, all zero-shot LLM embedding methods perform poorly. This may be
because the unidirectional causal mask in LLMs hinders bidirectional understanding, and unlike
natural language texts, source code is highly structured, which may make the text embedding
method not well-suited for code search. In contrast, CodeBridge exhibits consistent and superior
performance across the three datasets, highlighting its great cross-domain code search capabilities.
   We compare CodeBridge with RAPID under its setting, as shown in Table 6. The performance
of CodeBridge is comparable to that of RAPID on the Solidity and CoSQA datasets. CodeBridge
even outperforms CoCoSoDa with RAPID by 3.3% in MRR and 3.3% in top-1 accuracy on the SQL
dataset. It is noteworthy that while RAPID requires collecting code snippets in the target domain
and fine-tuning with synthesized data, while our approach demands no training, and requires
no intervention on the model, and thus is easy to implement and use. Thus, we believe our
approach provides unique benefits for zero-shot cross-domain code search.

                                      Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:16                                Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


Table 6. Comparison with baselines on RAPID’s setting. The best result is bolded, and the second best is
underlined.

                                  SQL                             Solidity                           CoSQA
      Model
                    MRR     Top-1    Top-5    Top-10   MRR     Top-1    Top-5   Top-10   MRR     Top-1   Top-5   Top-10
 GraphCodeBERT      0.175   0.126     0.211    0.257   0.292   0.247    0.336    0.369   0.500   0.377   0.649    0.740
     +RAPID         0.723   0.628     0.837    0.896   0.767   0.710    0.830    0.868   0.899   0.857   0.956    0.977
    UniXcoder       0.744   0.632     0.887    0.938   0.690   0.623    0.762    0.809   0.807   0.737   0.895    0.937
     +RAPID         0.790   0.713     0.880    0.923   0.779   0.723    0.848    0.876   0.897   0.846   0.966   0.980
   CoCoSoDa         0.559   0.448     0.691    0.766   0.753   0.692    0.822    0.866   0.876   0.826   0.945    0.969
     +RAPID         0.785   0.700     0.890   0.938    0.789   0.739    0.853   0.878    0.894   0.848   0.966   0.980
   CodeBridge       0.811   0.723    0.929    0.958    0.788   0.735    0.850   0.891    0.895   0.848   0.960   0.979

   We also conduct an ablation study to compare the performance of the three matching schemas.
As shown in Table 5, the results indicate that CodeBridge, which integrates all three schemas,
outperforms each matching schema by substantial margins. Specifically, the average improvements
of CodeBridge over query-code, query-comment, and code-code matching in MRR are 21.4%, 15.9%,
and 52.1%, respectively, across the three datasets. These results suggest the effectiveness of fusing
the three matching schemas, consistent with our empirical findings.

 Answer to RQ4: CodeBridge significantly outperforms existing zero-shot code search baselines
 by 21.4% to 24.9% on average in terms of MRR. Additionally, our fine-tuning-free approach
 yields results that are comparable to or even better than the state-of-the-art zero-shot cross-
 domain code search method RAPID, which requires fine-tuning. The ablation study confirms
 the effectiveness of fusing the three matching schemas.


7.2    RQ5: How effective is our fusion strategy?

Table 7. Results of different strategies on Solidity dataset. Since CombSUM and CombMNZ calculate the
frequency of occurrences in different result lists, they will reduce to an equally weighted linear combination
when the recall size equals the total size of the dataset. Thus, set a recall of 10 for CombSUM and CombMNZ.

                 Fusion Strategy    CombSUM       CombMNZ          RRF           Borda      Our Strategy
                      Top-1           0.523         0.523          0.494         0.480         0.571
                      Top-5           0.748         0.748          0.705         0.655         0.762
                     Top-10           0.803         0.803          0.799         0.727         0.833


  Table 7 presents the performance of our fusion strategy. While score-based methods outperform
rank-based methods, our strategy outperforms the four widely-used fusion strategies by substantial
margins, demonstrating the effectiveness of our fusion strategy. Specifically, our strategy outper-
forms the best-performing baselines, i.e., CombSUM and CombMNZ, by 9.2% in terms of top-1
accuracy. These results can be attributed to our strategy’s comprehensive consideration of both the
model’s semantic understanding ability and the quality of generated content.

 Answer to RQ5: The proposed fusion strategy outperforms four widely-used fusion strategies
 by substantial margins.


7.3    RQ6: How sensitive is CodeBridge to its components and hyper-parameters?
7.3.1 Different Retrieval Models. Based on the results shown in Table 8, we find that: (1) Integrating
tailored models for each matching schema contributes significantly to the effectiveness of

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                                                                                                                           FSE087:17


Table 8. Performance comparison with different retrieval models. "Uni" denotes UniXcoder, and "Co" denotes
CoCoSoDa. Each component in the combination of models is sequentially used for query-code matching,
query-comment matching, and code-code matching. CodeBridge integrates UniXcoder, BGE, and CoCoSoDa.
The best result is bolded, and the second best is underlined.

                                                SQL                                                                            Solidity                                                          CoSQA
     Model
                            MRR           Top-1    Top-5                                Top-10                      MRR     Top-1    Top-5                         Top-10         MRR        Top-1   Top-5            Top-10
   UniXcoder                0.744         0.632     0.887                                0.938                      0.544   0.452    0.651                          0.701         0.376      0.256   0.512             0.620
  Uni-Uni-Uni               0.795         0.697     0.914                                0.957                      0.581   0.491    0.687                          0.737         0.426      0.296   0.572             0.696
  Uni-BGE-Uni               0.824         0.737    0.940                                0.973                       0.640   0.559    0.736                          0.800         0.513      0.382   0.654             0.776
   CoCoSoDa                 0.555         0.441     0.690                                0.769                      0.625   0.541    0.728                          0.788         0.482      0.346   0.630             0.724
   Co-Co-Co                 0.592         0.478     0.732                                0.804                      0.635   0.547    0.747                          0.794         0.497      0.364   0.644             0.744
  Co-BGE-Co                 0.779         0.687     0.899                                0.934                      0.657   0.572    0.765                          0.820         0.525      0.390   0.676             0.772
  CodeBridge                0.811         0.723     0.929                                0.958                      0.658   0.571    0.762                         0.833          0.544      0.424   0.682            0.782



our approach. Specifically, models incorporating BGE (i.e., Uni-BGE-Uni and Co-BGE-Co) surpass
those without BGE (i.e., Uni-Uni-Uni and Co-Co-Co). For example, Uni-BGE-Uni outperforms
Uni-Uni-Uni by an average of 11.4% in MRR and Co-BGE-Co outperforms Co-Co-Co by an average
of 13.6% in MRR. This can be attributed to the superior natural language understanding ability of NL
embedding models, which provides more accurate query-comment matching than code pre-trained
models. CodeBridge also surpasses Uni-BGE-Uni on two datasets, highlighting the advantage of
using an advanced code search model like CoCoSoDa for query-code matching. In addition, Code-
Bridge’s performance is better than or comparable to Co-BGE-Co, indicating that using UniXcoder,
which performs outstandingly in code-to-code search tasks, contributes to the effectiveness of
our method. (2) Our approach exhibits consistent performance across different retrieval
models. All variants outperform their corresponding base models, i.e., UniXCoder and CoCoSoDa,
by substantial s. For example, Uni-Uni-Uni outperforms UniXcoder with an average MRR increase
of 9.0%, and Co-Co-Co achieves an average MRR enhancement of 3.8% over CoCoSoDa.

                                                                                                                                                        Impact of Different Weights on Top-10 Accuracy Distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                     >0.788: 41.9%
                                                                                                                                                  2.5
                                                                                    0.85
                                                                                                             0.80
                                                                                    0.80
                                                                                           Top-10 Accuracy




                                                                                    0.75                                                          2.0
                                                                                                             0.75
                                                                                                                                 Percentage (%)




                                                                                0.70

                                                                                0.65
                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                             0.70
                                                                                0.60

                                                                                0.55
                                                                               0.50                          0.65                                 1.0
                                                                              1.0
                                                                                    t
                                                                               en




                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                              m




                                                                                                             0.60
                                                                          om




                                                                  0.6
        0.0
                                                                        -C
                                                                   ry




               0.2                                          0.4
                                                                  ue




              Weig 0.4
                                                             fQ




                  ht o      0.6                       0.2                                                                                         0.0
                      f Qu
                                                            to




                          ery-C     0.8                                                                                                                  0.55     0.60     0.65     0.70    0.75     0.80    0.85
                                                       gh




                                ode             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                             Top-10 Accuracy
                                                   ei




                                          1.0
                                                  W




   (a) Visualizing the Effects of Weight Adjustments on                                                                     (b) Weight Distribution and Corresponding Top-10 Ac-
   Top-10 Accuracy                                                                                                          curacy

                      Fig. 5. Impact of Weight variations on Top-10 Accuracy: Visualization Results

7.3.2 Impact of Weight Selection. Fig. 5a illustrates the variation in top-10 accuracy resulting from
different weight adjustments of CodeBridge on the Solidity dataset. It can be observed that the
variation of top-10 accuracy generally exhibits a semi-peak profile and the peak is not sharp. This
suggests that suitable weights fall within a broad range rather than being critically sensitive to
minute changes. Fig. 5b shows the distribution of the weights that result in various ranges of top-10

                                                                  Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:18                                  Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


accuracy. Please note that CoCoSoDa achieves a zero-shot performance of 0.788 on top-10 accuracy.
The result shows that 41.9% of weight choices can produce outcomes that exceed CoCoSoDa. This
observation is consistent with the data presented in Fig. 5a. These results suggest that our approach
demonstrates robustness in weight selection.
               Table 9. Performance on the Solidity Dataset with Different Sampling Datasets

                        Sampling Dataset         MRR             Top-1           Top-5           Top-10
                         Java/Go/Python          0.658           0.571           0.762            0.833
                            JavaScript           0.663           0.579           0.766            0.828


  Table 9 illustrates the performance of our approach with different sample datasets on the Soldiity
dataset. Our approach achieves consistent performance with different sampling datasets. The
optimal weights for the Java, Go, and Python datasets are identical, and our approach achieves even
better results with the optimal weight on the JavaScript dataset. This indicates that our approach is
not sensitive to the sampling datasets.

                      Table 10. Performance on the Solidity Dataset with Different LLMs

                             LLM                         MRR             Top-1           Top-5        Top-10
                  DeepSeek-Coder-1.3B-Instruct           0.658           0.571           0.762         0.833
                  DeepSeek-Coder-6.7B-Instruct           0.664           0.580           0.771         0.824
                     CodeLlama-7B-Instruct               0.668           0.584           0.770         0.827
                     CodeQwen1.5-7B-Chat                 0.663           0.576           0.767         0.825


7.3.3 Different LLMs. Table 10 shows that our approach performs slightly differently with different
LLMs, which is attributed to that the zero-shot generation capabilities of different LLMs differ. It is
worth mentioning that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art baseline CoCoSoDa with
different LLMs. These results indicate that our approach is not sensitive to the used LLMs.

    Answer to RQ6: Our experiments demonstrate that CodeBridge can perform well across different
    retrieval models, weight selections, and LLMs.


8     Discussion
8.1     Data Leakage
LLMs have been trained on open-source data and may have seen the test samples in our experiments.
Utilizing LLMs to generate comments and code results in a possibility of data leakage. To mitigate
data leakage threats, we additionally collect a dataset containing 1000 Rust samples from GitHub
repositories created after February 2023 (the cutoff date for the pre-training data of DeepSeek-
Coder). We choose Rust, a language excluded from the embedding model’s pre-training data, to
ensure a cross-domain setting. Specifically, we (1) collect 82 non-fork repositories with the largest
number of stars; (2) apply the data filtering principles from GraphCodeBERT [Guo et al. 2020], e.g.,
removing samples with too short or too long queries; and (3) randomly select 1000 samples from
the collected 6331 functions.
  The results show that CodeBridge achieves an MRR of 0.664, outperforming UniXcoder and
CoCoSoDa by 15.7% and 8.1%, respectively. It also outperforms the query-code, query-comment,
and code-code matching schemas by 8.1%, 23.2%, and 87.6%, respectively. The results are consistent
with those reported in Section 7.1 across the three datasets. Therefore, we believe that the threat of
data leakage is limited. Full results can be found in [CodeBridge 2024].

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                           FSE087:19


8.2   Computational Efficiency
To better understand the benefits of CodeBridge and the trade-offs between training and inference
overhead, we analyze the computational overhead of CodeBridge compared to the fine-tuning-based
approach RAPID (based on UniXcoder). Both RAPID and CodeBridge require offline comment
generation, offline codebase processing, online embedding model inference, and online embedding
retrieval. However, CodeBridge leverages LLMs to generate code in real time for each query,
introducing additional LLM inference overhead, while RAPID fine-tunes UniXcoder with code and
generated comments in the target domain, resulting in additional training overhead. As offline
comment generation and offline codebase processing are required by both models and are one-time
efforts, we focus on their key differences, i.e., training overhead and LLM inference overhead. We
also report their online computational overheads to better understand their online efficiency. We
use the CoSQA dataset because it has the largest codebase among the three datasets, making it more
representative of real-world applications. During training and inference, the maximum lengths are
set to 128 for queries and 256 for code. We conduct training using UniXcoder’s official training
script and utilize vLLM [Kwon et al. 2023] for LLM inference. All experiments are performed on one
single A800 80GB GPU. We evaluate two batch sizes, i.e., 64 (the default batch size for UniXcoder
training) and 256 (the default maximum batch size for vLLM). To efficiently handle embedding
model inference and retrieval, we employ multiprocessing in these two stages.

                         Table 11. Training and inference overhead of different models

      Model         Batch Size   Training (min)        LLM Inference         Embedding Model      Retrieval (ms/sample)
                                                       (ms/sample)        Inference (ms/sample)
RAPID (UniXcoder)                    129.0                  —                       2.7                    2.7
                       64
   CodeBridge                         —                    36.0                     3.2                    2.8
RAPID (UniXcoder)                    123.0                  —                       2.6                    2.7
                       256
   CodeBridge                         —                    24.0                     3.0                    2.7


   Table 11 shows the computational overhead of RAPID and CodeBridge at each stage. The
differences in embedding model inference overhead and retrieval overhead between the two models
are negligible (less than 1 millisecond per sample). The primary difference lies in the training
overhead of RAPID and the inference overhead of LLM. With a batch size of 64, the training of
RAPID on one target domain takes 129.0 minutes, and the LLM inference latency of CodeBridge is
36.0 milliseconds per sample, which means the training overhead of RAPID can be used to infer
215,000 samples with the LLM. Increasing the batch size to 256 further raises this capacity to 307,500
samples, but does not significantly speed up embedding model inference and retrieval, as the GPU
utilization is already near its maximum. Prior work suggests that a web page response time of less
than 2 seconds is considered acceptable for most users [Lohr 2012]. The average inference latency of
CodeBridge is only about 42 milliseconds per sample. Thus we believe it is acceptable for daily use.
With the continuous and rapid advancements in LLM inference acceleration technologies [Kwon
et al. 2023; Zhao et al. 2024], the inference latency of LLM can be further reduced in the near future.

   While fine-tuning-based methods like RAPID might be cost-effective for a highly popular domain,
real-world queries often cover multiple domains (e.g., programming languages) [Guo et al. 2024;
Sheng et al. 2021]. In such multi-domain scenarios, our one-fit-all framework does not need to
maintain and update multiple models for different domains, which is a well-known challenge in
machine learning operations and introduces additional costs [Schelter et al. 2015]. CodeBridge
also benefits less frequently accessed domains. Due to the long-tail distribution [Index 2025], these
domains account for the majority and make up a significant share of use cases. For these domains,

                                   Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:20                                Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


using CodeBridge is more cost-effective as it eliminates the need for fine-tuning and managing one
model for each domain. Thus, we believe CodeBridge provides unique benefits.

8.3    Code-Comment Pattern
CodeBridge utilizes both generated code and comments. The code-comment matching, which
retrieves comments for the code generated from a query and then returns the associated code, may
also be used to improve code search. To investigate this idea, we evaluate code-comment matching
using CoCoSoDa, the state-of-the-art embedding model for code search. Experimental results show
that code-comment matching performs worst among the four matching schemas on the SQL and
CoSQA datasets and second worst on the Solidity dataset, with a relative margin of only 1.5%
over the worst schema. When combining the four matching schemas, grid search reveals that the
optimal weights for code-comment matching are consistently zero across all three datasets. Using
the sampling method in Section 5.3 to combine the four schemas, the new CodeBridge achieves
comparable results to the original CodeBridge on Solidity and CoSQA but suffers a 2.1% MRR drop
on SQL, likely due to the noise in the generated code and comments. Therefore, this matching
schema does not bring significant benefits considering its performance and additional overhead.
The full results are available at [CodeBridge 2024].

9     Threats to Validity
The generalizability of our experimental results is a threat to the validity of this study. Due to
practical constraints, we are unable to assess the cross-domain performance of our approach across
all languages. However, we test three languages, including two less common ones (SQL and Solidity),
which are not part of the languages in the training data for the PLMs we use. Experimental results
show that our approach exhibits consistent performance across the three datasets, showcasing its
language-agnostic nature and demonstrating its applicability across various domains.

10     Conclusion
In this paper, we conduct an empirical study to reveal the effectiveness of query-comment matching
and code-code matching in zero-shot cross-domain code search for the first time. The empirical
results reveal the high complementarity among three matching schemas, i.e., query-code, query-
comment, and code-code matchings. Based on the empirical findings, we propose CodeBridge,
a zero-shot cross-domain code search approach without fine-tuning. It first leverages LLMs to
generate comments and code to expand the query-code pairs and then integrates the three matching
schemas. We also propose a sampling-based fusion approach to combine the three similarity scores
to rank the code. Experimental results show that CodeBridge outperforms the state-of-the-art
PLM-based code search approaches and yields results that are better than or comparable to those
of the zero-shot cross-domain code search technique RAPID, which requires fine-tuning. In the
future, we plan to enhance the generation quality for retrieval and ways to improve efficiency.

11     Data Availability
Our replication package, including datasets and source code, is available at [CodeBridge 2024].

Acknowledgments
This research/project is supported by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
LZ25F020003), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62202420, No. 62202074),
and the National Research Foundation, under its Investigatorship Grant (NRF-NRFI08-2022-0002).
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not reflect the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                              FSE087:21


References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko
   Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).
Emad Aghajani, Csaba Nagy, Mario Linares-Vásquez, Laura Moreno, Gabriele Bavota, Michele Lanza, and David C Shepherd.
   2020. Software documentation: the practitioners’ perspective. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference
   on Software Engineering. 590–601. doi:10.1145/3377811.3380405
Sushil Bajracharya, Joel Ossher, and Cristina Lopes. 2014. Sourcerer: An infrastructure for large-scale collection and analysis
   of open-source code. Science of Computer Programming 79 (2014), 241–259. doi:10.1016/j.scico.2012.04.008
Rodger Benham and J Shane Culpepper. 2017. Risk-reward trade-offs in rank fusion. In Proceedings of the 22nd Australasian
   Document Computing Symposium. 1–8. doi:10.1145/3166072.3166084
Bing. 2024. Bing Search Engine. https://bing.com/. [Accessed 26-08-2024].
JC Borda. 1784. Mémoire sur les élections au scrutin, Histoire de l’Académie royale des sciences pour 1781. Paris (English
   Transl. by Grazia, A. 1953. Isis 44) (1784).
Lionel C Briand. 2003. Software documentation: how much is enough?. In Seventh European Conference onSoftware
   Maintenance and Reengineering, 2003. Proceedings. IEEE, 13–15. doi:10.1109/csmr.2003.1192406
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav
   Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information
   processing systems 33 (2020), 1877–1901.
Yitian Chai, Hongyu Zhang, Beijun Shen, and Xiaodong Gu. 2022. Cross-domain deep code search with meta learning. In
   Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering. 487–498. doi:10.1145/3510003.3510125
Yi Cheng and Li Kuang. 2022. CSRS: code search with relevance matching and semantic matching. In Proceedings of the 30th
   IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Comprehension. 533–542. doi:10.1145/3524610.3527889
CodeBridge. 2024. Replication Package. https://github.com/ZJU-CTAG/CodeBridge.
Gordon V Cormack, Charles LA Clarke, and Stefan Buettcher. 2009. Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet and
   individual rank learning methods. In Proceedings of the 32nd international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
   development in information retrieval. 758–759. doi:10.1145/1571941.1572114
Guodong Fan, Shizhan Chen, Cuiyun Gao, Jianmao Xiao, Tao Zhang, and Zhiyong Feng. 2024. Rapid: Zero-shot Domain
   Adaptation for Code Search with Pre-trained Models. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 33, 5
   (2024), 1–35. doi:10.1145/3641542
Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin
   Jiang, et al. 2020. CodeBERT: A Pre-Trained Model for Programming and Natural Languages. In Findings of the Association
   for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. 1536–1547. doi:10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.139
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2017. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks.
   In International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 1126–1135.
Edward Fox and Joseph Shaw. 1994. Combination of multiple searches. NIST special publication SP (1994), 243–243.
   doi:10.6028/nist.sp.500-225.vpi
Mingyang Geng, Shangwen Wang, Dezun Dong, Haotian Wang, Ge Li, Zhi Jin, Xiaoguang Mao, and Xiangke Liao. 2024. Large
   language models are few-shot summarizers: Multi-intent comment generation via in-context learning. In Proceedings of
   the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering. 1–13. doi:10.1145/3597503.3608134
Github. 2024. Github website. https://github.com/. [Accessed 26-08-2024].
Xiaodong Gu, Hongyu Zhang, and Sunghun Kim. 2018. Deep code search. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
   on Software Engineering. 933–944. doi:10.1145/3180155.3180167
Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Nan Duan, Yanlin Wang, Ming Zhou, and Jian Yin. 2022. UniXcoder: Unified Cross-Modal Pre-training
   for Code Representation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
   (Volume 1: Long Papers). 7212–7225. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.499
Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy,
   Shengyu Fu, et al. 2020. Graphcodebert: Pre-training code representations with data flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08366
   (2020).
Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Yu Wu, YK Li, et al.
   2024. DeepSeek-Coder: When the Large Language Model Meets Programming–The Rise of Code Intelligence. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2401.14196 (2024).
Junjie Huang, Duyu Tang, Linjun Shou, Ming Gong, Ke Xu, Daxin Jiang, Ming Zhou, and Nan Duan. 2021. CoSQA: 20,000+
   Web Queries for Code Search and Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
   Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
   Papers). 5690–5700. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.442
Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc Brockschmidt. 2019. Codesearchnet challenge:
   Evaluating the state of semantic code search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436 (2019).


                                       Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
FSE087:22                                 Keyu Liang, Zhongxin Liu, Chao Liu, Zhiyuan Wan, David Lo, and Xiaohu Yang


TIOBE Index. 2025. TIOBE Index for January 2025. https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/. [Accessed 08-02-2025].
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and
   Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of
   the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles. 611–626. doi:10.1145/3600006.3613165
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike
   Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks.
   Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 9459–9474.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone, Christopher
   Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. 2023. Starcoder: may the source be with you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161 (2023).
Xiaonan Li, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Xipeng Qiu, Hang Zhang, Bolun Yao, Weizhen Qi, Daxin Jiang, Weizhu Chen, and
   Nan Duan. 2022. Coderetriever: A large scale contrastive pre-training method for code search. In Proceedings of the 2022
   Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 2898–2910. doi:10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.187
Chao Liu, Xin Xia, David Lo, Cuiyun Gao, Xiaohu Yang, and John Grundy. 2021a. Opportunities and challenges in code
   search tools. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54, 9 (2021), 1–40. doi:10.1145/3480027
Chao Liu, Xin Xia, David Lo, Zhiwe Liu, Ahmed E Hassan, and Shanping Li. 2021b. Codematcher: Searching code based on
   sequential semantics of important query words. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 31,
   1 (2021), 1–37.
Steve Lohr. 2012. For impatient web users, an eye blink is just too long to wait. The New York Times (2012), A1–L.
Ziyang Luo, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Qingfeng Sun, Xiubo Geng, Wenxiang Hu, Chongyang Tao, Jing Ma, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin
   Jiang. 2023. Wizardcoder: Empowering code large language models with evol-instruct. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08568
   (2023).
Fei Lv, Hongyu Zhang, Jian-guang Lou, Shaowei Wang, Dongmei Zhang, and Jianjun Zhao. 2015. Codehow: Effective code
   search based on api understanding and extended boolean model (e). In 2015 30th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
   Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 260–270. doi:10.1109/ase.2015.42
Ji Ma, Ivan Korotkov, Yinfei Yang, Keith Hall, and Ryan McDonald. 2021. Zero-shot Neural Passage Retrieval via Domain-
   targeted Synthetic Question Generation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association
   for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume. 1075–1088. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.92
Niklas Muennighoff. 2022. Sgpt: Gpt sentence embeddings for semantic search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08904 (2022).
Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2022.
   Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474
   (2022).
Arkil Patel, Siva Reddy, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Pradeep Dasigi. 2024. Evaluating In-Context Learning of Libraries for Code
   Generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
   Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2908–2926.
Weiguo Pian, Hanyu Peng, Xunzhu Tang, Tiezhu Sun, Haoye Tian, Andrew Habib, Jacques Klein, and Tegawendé F Bissyandé.
   2023. MetaTPTrans: A meta learning approach for multilingual code representation learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
   Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 37. 5239–5247. doi:10.1609/aaai.v37i4.25654
N Reimers. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084
   (2019). doi:10.18653/v1/d19-1410
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. 2009. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. Foundations and
   Trends® in Information Retrieval 3, 4 (2009), 333–389. doi:10.1561/1500000019
Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez,
   Jérémy Rapin, et al. 2023. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 (2023).
Saksham Sachdev, Hongyu Li, Sifei Luan, Seohyun Kim, Koushik Sen, and Satish Chandra. 2018. Retrieval on source
   code: a neural code search. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and
   Programming Languages. 31–41. doi:10.1145/3211346.3211353
Sebastian Schelter, Felix Biessmann, Tim Januschowski, David Salinas, Stephan Seufert, and Gyuri Szarvas. 2015. On
   challenges in machine learning model management. (2015).
Xiang-Rong Sheng, Liqin Zhao, Guorui Zhou, Xinyao Ding, Binding Dai, Qiang Luo, Siran Yang, Jingshan Lv, Chi Zhang,
   Hongbo Deng, et al. 2021. One model to serve all: Star topology adaptive recommender for multi-domain ctr prediction.
   In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 4104–4113. doi:10.
   1145/3459637.3481941
Ensheng Shi, Yanlin Wang, Wenchao Gu, Lun Du, Hongyu Zhang, Shi Han, Dongmei Zhang, and Hongbin Sun. 2023a.
   Cocosoda: Effective contrastive learning for code search. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software
   Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2198–2210. doi:10.1109/icse48619.2023.00185
Ensheng Shi, Yanlin Wang, Hongyu Zhang, Lun Du, Shi Han, Dongmei Zhang, and Hongbin Sun. 2023b. Towards efficient
   fine-tuning of pre-trained code models: An experimental study and beyond. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT


Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
Zero-Shot Cross-Domain Code Search without Fine-Tuning                                                         FSE087:23


   International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 39–51. doi:10.1145/3597926.3598036
Jianhang Shuai, Ling Xu, Chao Liu, Meng Yan, Xin Xia, and Yan Lei. 2020. Improving code search with co-attentive
   representation learning. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Program Comprehension. 196–207.
Diomidis Spinellis. 2010. Code documentation. IEEE software 27, 4 (2010), 18–19. doi:10.1109/ms.2010.95
Jacob Mitchell Springer, Suhas Kotha, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, and Aditi Raghunathan. 2024. Repetition improves
   language model embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15449 (2024).
Daniela Steidl, Benjamin Hummel, and Elmar Juergens. 2013. Quality analysis of source code comments. In 2013 21st
   international conference on program comprehension (icpc). Ieee, 83–92. doi:10.1109/icpc.2013.6613836
Weisong Sun, Chunrong Fang, Yudu You, Yun Miao, Yi Liu, Yuekang Li, Gelei Deng, Shenghan Huang, Yuchen Chen,
   Quanjun Zhang, et al. 2023. Automatic code summarization via chatgpt: How far are we? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12865
   (2023).
Deze Wang, Boxing Chen, Shanshan Li, Wei Luo, Shaoliang Peng, Wei Dong, and Xiangke Liao. 2023a. One adapter for
   all programming languages? adapter tuning for code search and summarization. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International
   Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 5–16. doi:10.1109/icse48619.2023.00013
Kexin Wang, Nandan Thakur, Nils Reimers, and Iryna Gurevych. 2021a. GPL: Generative pseudo labeling for unsupervised
   domain adaptation of dense retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07577 (2021). doi:10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.168
Yanlin Wang, Lianghong Guo, Ensheng Shi, Wenqing Chen, Jiachi Chen, Wanjun Zhong, Menghan Wang, Hui Li, Hongyu
   Zhang, Ziyu Lyu, et al. 2023b. You Augment Me: Exploring ChatGPT-based Data Augmentation for Semantic Code
   Search. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 14–25. doi:10.1109/
   icsme58846.2023.00014
Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Gotmare, Nghi Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven Hoi. 2023c. CodeT5+: Open Code Large Language
   Models for Code Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
   Language Processing. 1069–1088. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.68
Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven CH Hoi. 2021b. CodeT5: Identifier-aware Unified Pre-trained Encoder-
   Decoder Models for Code Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
   Natural Language Processing. 8696–8708. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.685
Maximilian Wohrer and Uwe Zdun. 2018. Smart contracts: security patterns in the ethereum ecosystem and solidity. In 2018
   International Workshop on Blockchain Oriented Software Engineering (IWBOSE). IEEE, 2–8.
Xin Xia, Lingfeng Bao, David Lo, Pavneet Singh Kochhar, Ahmed E Hassan, and Zhenchang Xing. 2017. What do developers
   search for on the web? Empirical Software Engineering 22 (2017), 3149–3185. doi:10.1007/s10664-017-9514-4
Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, Niklas Muennighoff, Defu Lian, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2024. C-Pack: Packed Resources For
   General Chinese Embeddings. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
   in Information Retrieval. 641–649.
Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2023.
   RepoCoder: Repository-Level Code Completion Through Iterative Retrieval and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2023
   Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 2471–2484. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.151
Xinyu Zhang, Ji Xin, Andrew Yates, and Jimmy Lin. 2021. Bag-of-Words Baselines for Semantic Code Search. In Proceedings of
   the 1st Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Programming (NLP4Prog 2021). 88–94. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.nlp4prog-
   1.10
Yao Zhao, Zhitian Xie, Chen Liang, Chenyi Zhuang, and Jinjie Gu. 2024. Lookahead: An inference acceleration framework
   for large language model with lossless generation accuracy. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
   Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 6344–6355. doi:10.1145/3637528.3671614

Received 2025-02-25; accepted 2025-04-01




                                      Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 2, No. FSE, Article FSE087. Publication date: July 2025.
