                                                                                                                    PDF Download
                                                                                                                    3757915.pdf
                                                                                                                    04 April 2026
                                                                                                                    Total Citations: 1
                                                                                                                    Total Downloads: 309
    .
    .
        Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3757915




                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                          Published: 26 August 2025
        .
                                                                                                          Accepted: 27 July 2025
        .
    RESEARCH-ARTICLE                                                                                      Revised: 03 June 2025
    Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective                                          Received: 25 December 2024




                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                          Citation in BibTeX format
    YIHAO QIN, National University of Defense Technology China, Changsha, Hunan, China




                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                          .
    .
    SHANGWEN WANG, National University of Defense Technology China, Changsha, Hunan,
    China
    .
    YAN LEI, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
    .
    ZHUO ZHANG, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
    .
    BO LIN, National University of Defense Technology China, Changsha, Hunan, China
    .
    XIN PENG, National University of Defense Technology China, Changsha, Hunan, China
    .
    View all
    .
    .
    Open Access Support provided by:
    .
    National University of Defense Technology China
    .
    Chongqing University
    .
    Tianjin University
    .
                                                                                      ACM Transactions on Soware Engineering and Methodology
                                                                                                                 hps://doi.org/10.1145/3757915
                                                                                                                               EISSN: 1557-7392
.
Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective
YIHAO QIN, National University of Defense Technology, China
SHANGWEN WANG∗ , National University of Defense Technology, China
YAN LEI, Chongqing University, China
ZHUO ZHANG, Tianjin University, China
BO LIN, National University of Defense Technology, China
XIN PENG, National University of Defense Technology, China
JUN MA, National University of Defense Technology, China
LIQIAN CHEN, National University of Defense Technology, China
XIAOGUANG MAO, National University of Defense Technology, China
The software development process is characterized by an iterative cycle of continuous functionality implementation and
debugging, essential for the enhancement of software quality and adaptability to changing requirements. This process
incorporates two isolatedly studied tasks: Code Search (CS), which retrieves reference code from a code corpus to aid in code
implementation, and Fault Localization (FL), which identifies code entities responsible for bugs within the software project
to boost software debugging. The basic observation of this study is that these two tasks exhibit similarities since they both
address search problems. Notably, CS techniques have demonstrated greater effectiveness than FL ones, possibly because
of the precise semantic details of the required code offered by natural language queries, which are not readily accessible
to FL methods. Drawing inspiration from this, we hypothesize that a fault localizer could achieve greater proficiency if
semantic information about the buggy methods were made available. Based on this idea, we propose CosFL, an FL approach
that decomposes the FL task into two steps: query generation, which describes the functionality of the problematic code in
natural language, and fault retrieval, which uses CS to find program elements semantically related to the query, allowing for
finishing the FL task from a CS perspective. Specifically, to depict the buggy functionalities and generate high-quality queries,
CosFL extensively harnesses the code analysis, semantic comprehension, text generation, and decision-making capabilities
of LLMs. Moreover, to enhance the accuracy of CS, CosFL captures varying levels of context information and employs a
multi-granularity code search strategy, which facilitates a more precise identification of buggy methods from a holistic view.
The evaluation on 835 real bugs from 23 Java projects shows that CosFL successfully localizes 324 bugs within Top-1, which
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches by 26.6%-57.3%. The ablation study and sensitivity analysis further
validate the importance of different components and the robustness of CosFL across different backend models.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software testing and debugging.
∗ Corresponding author.


Authors’ Contact Information: Yihao Qin, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, yihaoqin@nudt.edu.cn; Shangwen
Wang, wangshangwen13@nudt.edu.cn, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China; Yan Lei, Chongqing University,
Chongqing, China, yanlei@cqu.edu.cn; Zhuo Zhang, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, zz8477@126.com; Bo Lin, National University of
Defense Technology, Changsha, China, linbo19@nudt.edu.cn; Xin Peng, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China,
xinpeng@nudt.edu.cn; Jun Ma, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, majun@nudt.edu.cn; Liqian Chen, National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, lqchen@nudt.edu.cn; Xiaoguang Mao, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, China, xgmao@nudt.edu.cn.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM 1557-7392/2025/8-ART
https://doi.org/10.1145/3757915


                                                                                                            ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
2   •    Qin et al.


Additional Key Words and Phrases: Fault localization, Code search, Language models, Debugging


1       INTRODUCTION
The software development process is an iterative cycle of continuous functionality implementation and debug-
ging [24]. During the implementation phase, programmers write code that meets specific requirements, but may
simultaneously introduce bugs into the software system. In the debugging phase, developers search for the root
causes through error signals and fix those program behaviors that do not meet expectations. This iterative process
is crucial for continuously improving software quality and flexibly adapting to changing requirements. In the
literature, two types of techniques are widely studied to facilitate development activities in this cycle, one for
each phase. The first is Code Search (CS) [47] during the implementation phase, which aims to assist developers
in reusing specific code snippets from open source repositories, rather than “reinventing the wheel”. The second
is Fault Localization (FL) [59] during the debugging phase, which aims to identify the buggy program elements
within the entire software system, and thus speed up the process of combating the bugs.
   During the years, these two types of techniques have generally been studied in isolation, with few existing
studies attempting to associate them. The only obvious commonality we can identify between these two types of
techniques is the trend for both to leverage the strengths of advanced deep learning techniques in their technical
development. Specifically, owing to the advancements in representation learning [53], CS techniques have evolved
from traditional keyword matching to learning the semantic correlation between the requirements and code
snippets. Similarly, FL techniques have also evolved from coverage-based program spectrum [3] to representation
learning [55], or even empowered by latest Large Language Models (LLMs) [23]. Despite their shared trend, there
is a significant discrepancy in the effectiveness of these two types of techniques. Experiments conducted on
domain-specific benchmarks have shown that state-of-the-art CS techniques [56] can accurately identify the
required code snippets for approximately 80% of the total requirements. In contrast, the latest FL technique [23]
can only locate the buggy program entities at the top position for around 30% of the cases.
   To boost the effectiveness of FL, the basic observation of this study is that the tasks of code search and fault
localization inherently share certain similarities, as they both solve a search problem. In practical terms, CS
takes requirements described in natural language queries as input and retrieves code from a large repository that
aligns with these intentions. In this context, the queries contain rich semantic information about the required
functionalities, allowing for the accurate identification of the necessary code [43]. On the other hand, FL takes
a buggy project as input and identifies the program entities responsible for the bug. While FL has access to
readily available information such as the source code, test suite, and failure information, it lacks explicit semantic
information about the functionality of the buggy code. To address this shortfall, researchers have delved into
leveraging advanced deep learning techniques, including coverage-based graph representation learning [34] and
function call-based code navigation [23]. Despite these efforts, there remains ample room for enhancements in the
efficacy of current fault localization techniques as aforementioned. Considering the differences in performance
and inputs between these two types of techniques, we postulate that a fault localizer may perform better if it is
provided with semantic information about the functionality of the buggy code. Consequently, the key idea of this
study is to equip the fault localizer with a natural language query that elucidates the functionality of
the erroneous code, enabling fault localization to be performed in a code search fashion.
   Based on this idea, we propose CosFL, a COode Search inspired Fault Localization approach that localizes
bugs at the method level. As illustrated in Figure 1, CosFL decomposes the fault localization task into two steps,
namely, query generation and fault retrieval. In the first step, a natural language query is generated to describe
the functionality of the possible problematic code, while in the second step, CS is employed to match suspicious
program elements semantically related to the query from the entire project. As shown, this pipeline differs
significantly from the workflows of existing representation learning-based FL [34] and code navigation-based

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective   •   3


                   Program Elements            Fault Analysis                   Fault Analysis
                                                                                                       Software
                                                                                    Query             Knowledge
                          Neural                    Code                                                 Base
                         Networks                 Navigation
                                                                                 Code Search

                        Result               Result + Rationale               Result + Rationale

                   Learning Based           Navigation Based                       CosFL

                Fig. 1. Illustration of CosFL and other FL pipelines. The rationale is generated by LLMs.

FL [23], thus exploring the feasibility of a new fashion for FL. Intuitively, our pipeline faces two primary challenges:
first, generating high-quality queries, as this information is not readily available and requires deduction through
intricate code logic; and second, precisely pinpointing the buggy code, as the accuracy of code search still
encounters challenges, particularly when different code segments within the same project exhibit semantic
overlaps. To address the first challenge, we leverage the capabilities of LLMs for their promising abilities towards
code analysis [61], semantic understanding [35], text generation [5], as well as autonomous decision-making [20].
In particular, we first construct a software knowledge base for the target project by amalgamating static analysis
details and dynamic method call graphs. The LLM autonomously determines whether the contextual information
suffices to describe the buggy functionality; if not, we supplement it with essential project-specific knowledge
from the base. This iterative process unfolds through multi-turn interactions and terminates when the LLM
attains adequate confidence to produce a high-quality query. To tackle the second challenge, we implement a
multi-granularity code search strategy that conducts retrieval at various program entity levels (i.e., chunk, method,
and module), allowing for a more comprehensive depiction of the semantics across different code snippets. Finally,
a voting mechanism from a holistic perspective is employed to pinpoint the fault localization results.
   We comprehensively evaluated the effectiveness of CosFL on Defects4J [22] and GrowingBugs [19] benchmarks,
which consist of 835 real bugs from 23 Java projects. The results indicate that CosFL performs well by successfully
pinpointing the fault location within the Top-1 position for 38.8% (324 out of 835) of the bugs. Compared to
other code navigation-based approaches, CosFL achieves a significantly higher localization accuracy, surpassing
AgentFL [39] and AutoFL [23] on the Top-1 metric by 26.6% and 57.3%, respectively. We further validated the
importance of different components in CosFL with an ablation study. Additionally, we conducted a sensitivity
analysis to illustrate the impact of different parameter settings on CosFL. The results demonstrate that CosFL
maintains robustness across various LLMs and embedding models. Finally, we presented specific case studies to
demonstrate how CosFL performs better than other approaches in FL tasks.
   Overall, the main contributions of this paper include:




     • Perspective. To boost the performance of FL, we propose to conduct this task from a new perspective,
       i.e., semantic code search.
     • Methodology. Based on our idea, we propose CosFL, a semantic code search-based fault localizer
       supported by LLMs’ strong code understanding and reasoning capabilities. CosFL is publicly available at
       https://github.com/IntHelloWorld/CosFL
     • Experiment. We comprehensively evaluate CosFL on 835 bugs from 23 projects, the results demonstrate
       that CosFL significantly outperforms existing LLM-empowered FL techniques.



                                                                                                   ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
4   •   Qin et al.


                         Fault Information                     Faulty Functionality                      Fault Location
          Failed Test Case                                                                 /**
          public void testIssue168b() {                    The method responsible for      * Removes unreferenced arguments from a
            removeGlobal = false;                          traversing and removing         * function declaration and when
            test("function a()" +                          unused references in the        * possible the function's callSites.
                 " {(function(x){ b(); })(1);}" +                                          */
                 "function a(){(function(x){b()})(1)}");
                                                           codebase is not correctly       private void removeUnreferencedFunctionArgs(
          }                                                handling the parameters of          Scope fnScope) {
                                                           nested functions, leading to   + if (!removeGlobals) { return; }
          Test Output                                      incorrect     removal     or    // ......
          Expected: function a(){(function(x){b()})(1)}                                    }
                                                           retention of variables.
            Result: function a(){(function(){b()})(1)}




               Fig. 2. Concept diagram of localizing Closure-1 bug from the perspective of semantic code search.

2       MOTIVATION
Figure 2 illustrates a bug from the closure-compiler 1 project. The root cause of this bug is that the function
arguments were optimized away under unexpected situations. In the Failed Test Case testIssue168b, the expected
program behavior is to parse the nested function (function(x)b();) as (function(x)b()). However, in the
Test Output, the argument x has been accidentally removed. To fix this bug, the developers added control logic to
the removeUnreferencedFunctionArgs method, preventing the program from deleting arguments when the
variable removeGlobal is set to false. As stated in the code comment, the changed method is responsible for
“Removing unreferenced arguments from a function declaration and when possible the function’s call sites”.
   From the perspective of semantic code search, the new FL paradigm envisioned in this work can be broadly
divided into two steps: First, given the Fault Information in Figure 2, we comprehensively analyze the root cause
of the fault to generate the Faulty Functionality, which describes the possible root cause in natural language
as “not correctly handling the parameters of nested function”. Such a description can indicate the basic semantic
information of the buggy function (e.g., we can infer that the buggy function handles the parameters of nested
function in this case). Subsequently, we transform the process of searching for suspicious program elements in FL
into a CS task, which takes the Faulty Functionality as a query to match program elements that are semantically
similar to it within the entire codebase. In this case, the approach we proposed successfully identifies the buggy
method as the most suspicious location. Intuitively, enhancing FL with CS offers numerous advantages over
traditional code navigation-based FL. Code search reviews the entire codebase directly, rather than progressively
narrowing the search scope from coarse to fine-grained, which may miss the fault location due to inaccurate
decisions. To help further understand the superiority of the new pipeline, we have demonstrated more case
studies in Sec 6.1.
   However, despite the extensive research on CS and FL over the past decades, few studies have applied the
spirit of CS to FL. We attribute this to the absence of prerequisite technologies. Specifically, for semantic-based
FL, a significant gap exists between fault-inducing phenomena (such as program output and error stack trace)
and fault functionality descriptions that can be used for semantic code search. Traditional statistical learning
methods and representation learning approaches struggle to bridge this gap. Fortunately, with the continuous
advancement of artificial intelligence technologies, the emergence of large language models has made it possible
to automatically diagnose problems in programs [4, 61], thus filling the gap in FL from the CS perspective. In the
next section, we will explain our proposed solution in detail.

3       APPROACH
In this work, we propose CosFL, a new paradigm for Fault Localization from the perspective of semantic
COde Search. CosFL primarily focuses on method-level FL, since this granularity level is most preferred by
developers [25] and also serves as the foundation for many automated software development techniques [63].
1 https://storage.googleapis.com/google-code-archive/v2/code.google.com/closure-compiler/issues/issue-253.json



ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                                                    Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective                                  •     5


            2   Query Generation                                                                                                                    3   Fault Retrieval
                                                                                                                      Module
                                                                                                                      Retrieval
                                                                                      ╳ Module ...

 START                                                                                ╳ Method ...                    Method
                                                                                      ╳ Chunk ...
                                                                                                                      Retrieval              ...
                 Fault              LLM                 Enough                                                         Chunk
             Information                              Information                                                     Retrieval
                                                                                 Multi-Granularity                                                                            LLM
                                                                                     Queries
                                                                                                                                      ...                 ...


                    Request More           Module                   ...                         ...             ...                                                                               END
                                                                                                                                                        Voting
                     Information          Summary                                                                                            ...
                                                                                                                                                                         Result
                                                              Module Index             Method Index         Chunk Index
   1   Software Knowledge Base Construction


                                          Uncovered                                                                                                                            Method
                                           Method                                                                                                                             Summary
                                                                                                               Module
                                                                                                              Summary
                                           Covered                                                                                                                         Chunk
                                           Method                                                                                                                        Summaries




                                                                                                                                                                                - Description 1
                                                                          - Title ...                                                                       - Functionality       ...
                                                                          - Summary ...
                                                                          - Findings
                                                                                                                             Module                           ...               - Description 2
                                                                              - summary ...                                 Summary                                               ...
                                                          LLM                 - explain ...                                                                      Method   Chunk
  Instrumentation                                                                                                                             LLM               Summary Summaries
                       Call Graph                                           Module
                                       Module                              Summary
   1a Module Level                    Detection                                                                           Method Code               1b Method + Chunk Level



Fig. 3. Overview of CosFL. 1 : Construct the Software Knowledge Base based on the method call graph covered by failed
tests, which includes two steps 1a Module Level and 1b Method+Chunk Level knowledge extraction. 2 : Given the fault
information of the failed tests, the LLM requests information from the knowledge base to generate multi-granularity queries
that describe the suspicious software functionalities. 3 : Perform multi-granularity code search and finally output the
suspicious methods through a voting mechanism.

To achieve better compatibility between CS and FL, CosFL provides two solutions: 1) To generate high-quality
queries, CosFL constructs a software knowledge base, providing useful context for LLM to understand the root
causes comprehensively. 2) To improve the search precision, we implement multi-granularity semantic CS to more
accurately localize buggy methods, and further optimize the localization results through a voting mechanism.
   An overview of CosFL is shown in Figure 3. In this work, we define a module [27] as a group of closely
functionally related methods and a chunk [45] as a sequence of continuous statements in a method. These two
levels of granularity, describing program semantics from both a holistic and a detailed perspective, respectively,
contribute to comprehensively depicting the context of methods and precisely pinpointing the fault locations.
In the 1 Software Knowledge Base Construction phase, we utilize program instrumentation to collect the
runtime behavior of the software, and then extract software knowledge at different granularities (i.e., module,
method, and chunk) through LLM. In the 2 Query Generation phase, LLM starts with the fault information to
generate queries that describe the suspicious software functionalities in multiple granularities. Particularly, the
LLM can actively request module-level knowledge from the Module Index to more comprehensively understand
the software’s internal behavior. In the 3 Fault Retrieval phase, CosFL employs CS to search for program
elements at different granularities, and finally output a list of suspicious methods through a voting mechanism.




                                                                                                                                            ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
6   •   Qin et al.


3.1     Software Knowledge Base Construction
Given software with bugs, CosFL first collects the runtime behavior of the software and uses LLM to extract
project-specific knowledge at different granularities. The acquired multi-granularity knowledge will provide
informational support for the subsequent FL process. Specifically, we construct the software knowledge base
for addressing two limitations: 1) From the fault analysis perspective, existing LLM-based FL methods [23] only
provide basic fault information as input, such as test case and test output, while lacking a deep understanding of
the complete software architecture and runtime behavior. This may threaten LLM’s judgment and consequently
affect the FL effectiveness; 2) From the code retrieval perspective, semantically similar code snippets may exist at
different locations in one project, necessitating fine-grained context information (e.g., chunk-level semantics)
for effective differentiation. As shown in the lower part of Figure 3, the knowledge base construction is divided
into two stages. At a coarse granularity, CosFL first collects dynamic runtime information of the software and
extracts module-level knowledge. Based on the module-level knowledge, CosFL further extracts method- and
chunk-level knowledge for each method at a fine granularity. In the following content, we will introduce these
two stages in detail.
   Module-Level Knowledge Extraction. At this stage, our objective is to acquire module-level knowledge
within the software. According to the consensus in software architecture [27], we naturally consider methods as
minimal functional units and define a module as a group of closely functionally related methods. Specifically, to
more accurately represent the software behavior that triggers the bug, the functional modules mentioned in this
paper are dynamically constructed, that is, all methods comprising a module must have been executed at runtime.
   Call Graph Construction. We employ program instrumentation techniques to collect method invocation logs
during software execution and generate a dynamic method call graph on the fly. Specifically, we first execute each
failed test case individually and use instrumentation techniques to track method invocation information, thereby
generating a method call graph for each test case. Compared to spectrum-based fault localization techniques [40],
CosFL does not require a large-scale test suite that includes both passed and failed test cases, thus significantly
reduces execution costs. In each graph, we record the method ID, invocation edges, and the frequency of each
invocation. During this process, we exclude methods that are not covered during runtime, which avoid the
extraction of knowledge contaminated by untriggered program functionalities. In addition, since we only focus
on methods within the target software, utility methods from external libraries (such as StringUtils.isEmpty())
will also be excluded in the call graph. Then, we merge all the call graphs into a single global call graph. Ideally,
the global call graph contains the covered methods and the invocation relationships between methods during
the execution of all failed test cases, which can be used to prompt the LLM with additional internal software
information. It is worth noting that we do not maintain an individual call graph for each failed test case. Since
different failed test cases triggered by the same bug often cover overlapping methods, maintaining a global call
graph is more cost-effective and easier to manage.
   Module Detection. However, in large-scale software systems, the size of the dynamic method call graphs can
be extremely large. For instance, the call graph of the example mentioned in Figure 2 contains 1,082 nodes
and 2,064 edges. Given that LLMs struggle to comprehend inputs of such magnitude [32], it is necessary to
appropriately decompose the entire call graph (corresponding to the overall software behavior) into smaller
subgraphs (corresponding to the functional modules). To this end, we noticed that the principle of defining
functional modules in software engineering is high cohesion and low coupling [15], a characteristic highly
similar to communities in networks. In graph theory, a community can be defined as a subset of nodes that
are densely connected to each other but sparsely connected to nodes in other communities within the same
graph [6]. Inspired by this concept, we identify functional modules within the call graph through the Leiden [50]
community detection algorithm. The Leiden algorithm optimizes modularity and identifies tightly connected
groups within the network through an iterative process of moving nodes to neighboring communities, refining


ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                           Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective   •   7


the community structure, and then aggregating the communities into new nodes. In the algorithm, the quality
function serves as the optimization objective, guiding node movement and community partitioning, evaluating
the quality of divisions, and affecting the convergence and outcomes of the algorithm. In this work, we measure
the quality of a detected module by the density and frequency of method invocations within it. Our intuition
is that the methods within the same module usually collaborate to complete certain tasks, thus tend to more
frequently call each other during runtime. Assuming that edge (𝑖, 𝑗) in the call graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) have weights
𝑤𝑖 𝑗 (i.e., method 𝑖 invoke method 𝑗 for 𝑤𝑖 𝑗 times), the quality function 𝑄 of graph 𝐺 is as follows:
                                                                      
                                                 1 Õ            𝑘𝑖 𝑘 𝑗
                                                                                                                     (1)
                                                                                    
                                           𝑄=            𝑤𝑖 𝑗 −          𝛿 𝑐𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑗
                                                𝑊 𝑖,𝑗            𝑊
   Where 𝑊 = 𝑖,𝑗 𝑤𝑖 𝑗 is the sum of all edge weights in the graph, 𝑘𝑖 = 𝑗 𝑤𝑖 𝑗 is the weighted degree of vertex 𝑖,
                 Í                                                                  Í
𝑐𝑖 is the module to which vertex 𝑖 belongs. 𝛿 (𝑐𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑗 ) is an indicator function whose value equals to 1 if 𝑐𝑖 = 𝑐 𝑗 ,
and 0 otherwise. The value of quality 𝑄 ranges between [−1, 1], a higher 𝑄 indicates a better partition, implying
that the connections within the detected functional modules are tighter, while the connections between the
modules are looser. Based on the definition of 𝑄, the Leiden algorithm is able to continuously search the optimal
partition of the call graph. Specifically, we set the initial partition of the algorithm as that each node is treated as
an individual community. The termination condition is defined as either the quality metric 𝑄 no longer improving
or the process reaching the maximum number of iterations, which is set to 5. We then regard each clustered call
subgraph as a candidate function module.
   Model Size Optimization. For module detection, our objective is to identify functional modules that encapsulate
module-level knowledge and can be comprehensively analyzed by the LLMs. However, the clustering process of
the Leiden algorithm is greedy, which may produce functional modules that have very different sizes from each
other. As shown in Figure 4a, under the default Leiden algorithm, the sizes of the clustered modules approximate
an exponential distribution. We observed that there are 1,623 small modules with sizes in the range of [0, 5),
accounting for 21.6%. Meanwhile, large modules with sizes greater than 60 constitute 13.2% of the total cases. To
ensure the validity of CosFL, we argue that it is crucial to regulate the size of each module, keeping it within an
appropriate and balanced range. This regulation serves two key purposes: First, modules that are too small should
be avoided because they typically involve interactions among only a few methods. Such a limited scope fails
to capture broader architectural patterns, resulting in a lack of holistic software structure information. Second,
excessively large modules should also be prevented, as they encompass too many methods. When a module
becomes too large, the overwhelming context would make it challenging for the LLM to effectively analyze and
summarize the core insights [32]. Therefore, striking the right balance in module size is essential, as it ensures that
each module is neither too narrow to miss important architectural context nor too broad to hinder meaningful
summarization by LLMs. This balance allows CosFL to maintain both precision and comprehensiveness in its
analysis.
   To address the above issue, we propose to optimize the model size through two heuristic strategies. First, the
Leiden algorithm supports setting a parameter to limit the maximum module size. This configuration prevents the
algorithm from clustering excessively large modules, but may still result in overly small modules. Next, we further
designed an algorithm to prevent the formation of excessively small modules. As shown in Algorithm 1, the input
is all of the detected modules 𝐶 and a parameter 𝑁 to regulate the minimal module size. For each undersized
module 𝑐𝑖0 (line 2), we first select the most closely connected adjacent module 𝑐𝑡 as the target module (lines 4-16),
which is determined by the magnitude of the total edge weights between modules (lines 7-13). Subsequently, we
migrate all method nodes from the undersized modules to the target module 𝑐𝑡 (lines 17-19), thus eliminating
small modules without losing any node.



                                                                                           ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
8    •    Qin et al.


                        1750                                                                          3500
                        1500                                                                          3000
         Number of Modules

                        1250                                                                          2500
                        1000                                                                          2000
                         750                                                                          1500
                         500                                                                          1000
                         250                                                                           500
                           0                                                                             0
                                0
                                5
                               10
                               15
                               20
                               25
                               30
                               35
                               40
                               45
                               50
                               55
                               60
                               65
                               70
                               75
                               80
                               85
                               90
                               95
                              100
                              105
                              110
                              115
                              120
                              125
                              130
                              135
                              140
                              145
                              150
                              155
                              160
                              165
                              170
                              175
                              510


                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                           7
                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                          13
                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                          21
                                                                                                          23
                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                          60
                                                        Module Size                                                   Module Size
                                               (a) Before optimization.                                      (b) After optimization.

Fig. 4. Module size distribution before and after optimization. We place the bars between two scales (e.g., 5 and 10) in the
figure to indicate the number of modules whose sizes are within this interval (e.g., [5, 10)).


    Algorithm 1: Eliminate undersized modules.
   Input: 𝑁 : the minimal module size. 𝐶: All modules.
   Output: 𝐶: The changed modules.
     0
 1 𝐶 = getUndersizedModules(𝐶, 𝑁 ) ;                                                         /* Get modules in 𝐶 whose size is smaller than 𝑁 */
         0     0
 2 for 𝑐 𝑖 in 𝐶 do
 3      𝑉 = getNodes(𝐶 0 ) ;                                                                                         /* All method nodes in 𝑐𝑖0 */
 4      𝑐𝑡 = None ;                                                                                /* The target appropriate-size module for 𝑐𝑖0 */
 5      𝜖 =0;                                                     /* A variable to record the weight between the undersized and target module */
 6      for 𝑐𝑖 in 𝐶 − 𝐶 0 do
 7            𝜖0 = 0 ;                                                                               /* Record the weight between two modules */
 8            for 𝑣𝑖 in 𝑉 do
 9                 𝐶 ∗ = getNeighbors(𝑣𝑖 ) ;                                 /* Get all modules that have calling relationships with method 𝑣𝑖 */
10                 for 𝐶𝑖∗ in 𝐶 ∗ do
11                      if 𝐶𝑖∗ == 𝑐𝑖 then
12                            𝑤 = getWeight(𝑣𝑖 ,𝐶𝑖∗ ) ;                       /* 𝑤 is the sum of edge weights between node 𝑣𝑖 and module 𝐶𝑖∗ */
13                            𝜖0+ = 𝑤

14                           if 𝜖 0 > 𝜖 then
15                                 𝜖 = 𝜖0;
16                                 𝑐𝑡 = 𝑐𝑖

17           for 𝑣𝑖 in 𝑉 do
18                𝑐𝑡 .addNode(𝑣𝑖 );
19                𝑐𝑖0 .removeNode(𝑣𝑖 );

20   Return 𝐶




ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                             Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective   •   9


   To determine the appropriate range for module size, we predefined                        Module Size 0-10
three range settings (i.e., [0, 10), [5, 15), and [10, 20)) and evaluated the               Module Size 5-15
                                                                                            Module Size 10-20
FL performance of CosFL under varying module size ranges. Specif-
                                                                                                   T1
ically, we selected 75 bugs from three projects within the Growing-
                                                                                                  36
Bugs [19] dataset as the validation set, including 27 bugs from project
commons-beanutils, 18 bugs from project commons-dbcp, and 30 bugs                                 32
                                                                              T5                                   T10
from project Scxml. As illustrated in Figure 5, the results reveal that          54
                                                                                     49
                                                                                                  28
                                                                                                            52
                                                                                                                56
CosFL achieves the best performance under module size range [5, 15),                       44         48

it successfully locates 35, 52, and 55 bugs within Top-1, Top-3, and                          41.5 41.2
Top-5, respectively. Consequently, for the default version of CosFL, we                   42.4         42.0
configured the minimum module size parameter to 5 and the maximum                     43.3                 42.8
                                                                                  50-MFR                    50-MAR
module size parameter to 15. The distribution of the model sizes after
optimization is shown in Figure 4b, where 97.5% of the modules fall Fig. 5. The performance of CosFL under dif-
within the size range of [5, 25). Note that since we eliminate overly ferent module size settings.
small modules by merging them into nearby modules, the existence of
modules with a size greater than 15 is normal.


    Prompt 1: Module-Level Knowledge Extraction

    You are an expert software analyst with deep knowledge of program structure.
    # Goal
    As a senior software engineer specializing in code analysis, generate a comprehensive functionality summary report
    for a method call subgraph from a program execution. This report should include an overview of the key methods in
    the subgraph and their calling relationships.
    # Call Graph
    Methods: <Information of the method nodes in the call graph>
    Calls: <Call relationships between method nodes>
    # Report Structure
    The report should include the following sections:
      - TITLE: A short but specific title representing the main functionality of the call graph …
      - SUMMARY: An executive summary of the subgraph’s overall structure …
      - DETAILED FINDINGS: A list of insights about the call graph …
   # Example
   Methods:
   id,className:methodName(startLine-endLine),comment
   1,Main:main(1-10),The main entry point of the program
   …
   Calls:
   id,source,target
   1,Main:main(1-10),DataProcessor:processData(11-20)
   …
   Output:
   ”title”: ”Data Processing and Validation Flow”
   ”summary”: ”This subgraph demonstrates a simple data processing and validation flow …”
   ”findings”:
        ”summary”: ”Central role of processData method”
        ”explanation”: ”The processData method is not only responsible for data processing but also ensures data validity
   by calling …”
       …



                                                                                             ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
10   •   Qin et al.


   Knowledge Extraction. After module detection, we match each functional module in the dynamic call graph
with the static code repository, which provides additional attributes for each method node in the graph, such as
method comments, source code, etc. Finally, we leverage the graph structure data analysis capabilities [8, 12] of
LLMs to extract knowledge at the functional module level, which is expressed in the form of natural language
module summary as shown in Figure 3. An example prompt for the LLM is shown in Prompt 1. For each module
(represented by a call subgraph) to be summarized, we transform the method nodes and call edges in the graph
into the text format that can be interpreted by LLMs. Acting as an expert software analyst, the LLM is instructed
to “generate a comprehensive functionality summary report” for each functional module. The generated report
in # Report Structure should consists of three sections: TITLE names the overall functionality of the module;
SUMMARY summarizes the overall structure of the module and how methods interact with each other; and
DETAILED FINDINGS is a list of insights that elaborate on the behavior of some important methods.

     Prompt 2: Method- & Chunk-Level Knowledge Extraction

     You are a code summarizer with deep knowledge of different programming languages.
     # Goal
     As a senior software engineer specializing in code summarization, your task is to generate comprehensive
     documentation for a given method. This documentation should succinctly describe the key functionality of the
     method and provide a detailed walkthrough of its workflow.
     # Provided Information
     Method Code: <The method code to be summarized>
     Developer Comment: <Any additional comments or insights provided by the developer, if available>
     Module Context: <The broader context in which the method operates, if available>
     # Report Structure
     The report should include the following sections:
       - FUNCTIONALITY: A summary of the method, its role within the broader module context …
       - DESCRIPTION: A list of detailed step-by-step explanation of the method’s workflow.
     # Example
     Method Code:
     public void processTasks(List<Task> tasks) {
         while (!tasks.isEmpty()) {
            Task task = getNextTask(tasks);
            handleTask(task);
            …
     Developer Comment:
     Handle a list of tasks by some order. Return when all tasks are done.
     Module Context:
     ”title”: ”Data Processing and Validation Flow”
     ”summary”: ”This subgraph demonstrates a simple data processing and validation flow …”
     …
     Output:
     ”functionality”: ”Manages the sequential processing of tasks in a list until all are completed.”
     ”description”:
          ”Initially checks if the task list is not empty. If tasks remain, it retrieves the next task …”
          ”Each retrieved task is then processed by the handleTask method”
          …

  Method- & Chunk-Level Knowledge Extraction. In this stage, our objective is to acquire knowledge at
the method and chunk levels within the software. We observe that existing LLM-based FL techniques typically
require method-level semantic information to search for suspicious locations. However, the semantic information
maintained by these techniques for individual methods is limited to the internal scope of the method, without
considering the runtime context in which the method is executed. For instance, AutoFL [23] directly utilizes the

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •   11


method code and comments as information sources, AgentFL [39] further employs LLMs to enhance method
comments, but the semantic information remains confined within a few methods. To address this, we propose
to consider the runtime context of the method when extracting method-level knowledge. For each method, its
context is represented by the functional module summary (we have obtained in the previous stage) where the
method is located.
   Nevertheless, due to the characteristics of object-oriented languages [26] and the prevalence of code clone [41],
many methods in code base may exhibit similarity in overall functionality while differing in internal logical details.
In such situations, CS based solely on method-level semantics may struggle to distinguish subtle differences
between similar methods, thereby compromising the FL performance. Consequently, we utilized LLM to summarize
the detailed workflow of each method, thus decomposing the overall functionality of a method into finer-grained
chunk-level units. Here, we define a chunk as a program logic unit composed of one or more continuous
statements in a method. With the chunk-level knowledge, CosFL can differentiate similar methods through
exploiting fine-grained variances in their detailed implementations, thereby further improving the FL accuracy.

    Prompt 3: Query Generation

    You are a Software Diagnostics Specialist specializing in software fault analysis and fault localization.
    # Goal
    Your task is to analyze the provided fault information and either identify the potentially faulty functionality or
    request additional information as needed.
   # Fault Information
   Test Case Code: <Source Code of the Failed Test Case>
   Exception Stack Trace: <Exception Stack Trace>
   Test Output: <Test Output>
   Module Details: <The Retrieved Module Summaries>
    # Analysis Process
    1.
     Analyze provided information and interactions between methods that might cause the fault.
     2. Formulate a specific question to gather necessary details.
     2. Describe the potentially faulty functionality at various levels of detail.
    # Response Format
     - Specifying the additional information needed to complete the analysis, the response should contain
    
      a ‘request’ field:
    
    
    
    
            ”request”: ”<Module details or specific information you needed to better understand the fault>”
    
    
    
    
     - Describing the likely location and nature of the bug at increasing levels of detail, the response should
    
    
    
     contain ‘module’, ‘method’, and ‘chunk’ fields:
            ”module”: ”<A description of the likely functional module where the bug resides>”
    
    
    
            ”method”: ”<A description of the functionality in the software which may cause the fault>”
    
    
    
    
            ”chunk”: ”<A more detailed description of the specific code logic that is likely causing the bug>”
    
    
    


   An example prompt is shown in Prompt 2, for each method, we generate both method- and chunk-level
knowledge in one round of conversation with the LLM. In # Example, it can be observed that the semantic
information for each method is derived not only from the Method Code and Developer Comment, but also
includes the corresponding Module Context. As an expert code summarizer, the LLM is tasked to “describe the
key functionality and provide a detailed walkthrough of the workflow” for each method. The generated report
in # Report Structure has two parts, where FUNCTIONALITY provides a detailed description of the method’s
functionality and its role within the module context, and DESCRIPTION is a list of paragraphs that explain the
method’s workflow in detail, which is used as the chunk-level knowledge of this method.

                                                                                                  ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
12    •     Qin et al.




                         Fault Information                                  Module-Level Knowledge                              Multi-Granularity Queries
          Failed Test Case                                   Title: RemoveUnusedVars Method Subgraph Analysis                Module-Level Query
          public void testIssue168b() {                      Summary: This module focuses on the methods within               The bug resides in the component
            removeGlobal = false;                            the RemoveUnusedVars class, which are responsible for            responsible for removing unused
            test("function a()" +                            removing unused variables in a JavaScript codebase.              variables in JavaScript code.
                 " {(function(x){ b(); })(1);}" +
                                                             Findings:
                 "function a(){(function(x){b()})(1)}");
                                                             1. The process method serves as the central orchestrator        Method-Level Query
          }
                                                             for the removal of unused variables ...
                                                             2. The removeUnreferencedFunctionArgs method is                  The method for removing unused
           Test Output                                                                                                        references in the codebase is not
                                                             crucial for traversing the codebase and handling scopes ...
          Expected: function a(){(function(x){b()})(1)}      3. The RemoveUnusedVars methods integrate with other             correctly handling the parameters of
            Result: function a(){(function(){b()})(1)}       classes such as Compiler and Node to enhance their               nested functions, leading to
                                                             functionality ...                                                incorrect removal of variables.

                                                                                                                              Chunk-Level Query
              LLM Requests for Module Knowledge                                                                               The buggy code is likely not properly
                                                                                                                              traversing the parameter list of
          Provide information about the component
                                                             Retrieve
                                                                                         ...                                  nested functions. Specifically, the
          responsible for the JavaScript compilation and                                                                      PARAM_LIST node for the nested
          optimization process, specifically the module or                                                                    function in Tree2 is missing the
          class handling the removal of unused variables.                                                                     NAME ‘x’ ...
                                                                                Knowledge Base

                                       Step 1: Module Knowledge Retrieval                                            Step 2: Multi-Granularity Queries Generation


                  Fig. 6. A running example for query generation. We emphasize the crucial “hints” for LLM in red .

3.2        Query Generation
As shown in Figure 3, the objective of the Query Generation phase is to provide the Multi-Granularity Queries as the
input for the following Fault Retrieval process. Specifically, to more comprehensively depict the characteristics and
context of suspicious software functionalities, CosFL generates three queries within different granularities (i.e.,
module, method, and chunk). However, reconsidering the example in Figure 2, the fault information typically only
contains the software’s expected behavior (Failed Test Case), actual behavior (Test Output, which is sometimes
not available), and a small portion of the execution path (such as the exception stack trace), while the vast majority
of the software’s internal logic remains a black box. This prevents LLM from comprehensively understanding the
root cause, let alone generating high-quality queries. To mitigate this problem, we allow the LLM to retrieve the
relevant functional module knowledge from the constructed Software Knowledge Base before it generates the
multi-granularity queries. The LLM prompt is shown in Prompt 3, we use the italic text and dashed line to mark
the prompt for the two steps.
   Step 1: Module Knowledge Retrieval. For each failed test, we first instruct the LLM to analyze the basic
fault information and “formulate a specific question to gather necessary details”. As described in # Response Format,
the LLM is required to respond with a request which describes the needed functional module details. In this
step, we use semantic search to find the most relevant module summary from the module index and add it to
the Module Details section within # Fault Information. It is worth noting that we restrict the LLM to retrieve
module-level knowledge. This approach facilitates the LLM’s global understanding of potential root causes of the
bug while preventing it from generating overly specific queries that lack generalizability.
   Step 2: Multi-Granularity Queries Generation. After being provided with the module knowledge that is
relevant to the buggy software functionality, the LLM is then asked to “Describe the potentially faulty functionality
at various levels of detail”. Specifically, the LLM is asked to generate three fields (e.g., module, method, and chunk)
to depict the suspicious functionality in the software at different levels of granularity. These fields will be used as
queries for the subsequent multi-granularity code search process.
   Running Example. A running example for the same bug we have mentioned in Section 2 is illustrated in
Figure 6. In Step 1: Module Knowledge Retrieval, the LLM initially assesses the potential cause of the bug from the


ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                           Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •          13


fault information and generates a request to gain further insight into “the module or class handling the removal of
unused variables”. Subsequently, CosFL utilizes this request to retrieve the most relevant module information
from the knowledge base. The Summary field indicates that this module mainly “focuses on the methods within
the RemoveUnusedVars class, which are responsible for removing unused variables”. Specifically, the functionality of
the buggy method removeUnreferencedFunctionArgs is also included in the Findings field. For Step 2: Multi-
Granularity Queries Generation, CosFL incorporates both fault information and retrieved module-level knowledge
to further analyze the root cause and generate multi-granularity queries. As shown in the figure, the generated
queries exhibit high semantic relevance to the buggy method. For instance, the Method-Level Query suggests
the fault might stem from a method that “not correctly handling the parameters of nested functions”. With these
multi-granularity queries, the subsequent code search process is able to pinpoint the bug-related methods from
the codebase.

3.3    Fault Retrieval
As illustrated in the upper right of Figure 3, the Fault Retrieval phase takes the Multi-Granularity Queries as input,
which aims to pinpoint the suspicious buggy methods from the perspective of semantic code search (CS). To
achieve this, we leverage the text embedding [16] technique which is widely used in CS [14]. Text embedding
models map natural/program language text into a high-dimensional vector space, where semantically similar texts
are positioned closer to each other. For the fault localization task, our insight is that the suspicious functionalities
derived from LLM analysis and the actual buggy location can be semantically similar. Specifically, the workflow
of Fault Retrieval consists of two steps:
   Multi-Granularity Retrieval. We first build embedding indexes for program elements at different levels
using a text embedding model, where the embedded textual content is derived from the knowledge acquired in
the previous Section 3.1. Formally, we represent all program elements as 𝐸 = {𝐺, 𝑀, 𝑆 }, where 𝐺 = {𝑔1, . . . , 𝑔 |𝐺 | }
denotes function modules (i.e., dynamic call subgraphs), 𝑀 = {𝑚 1, . . . , 𝑚 |𝑀 | } represents methods, and 𝑆 =
{𝑆 𝑚1 , . . . , 𝑆 𝑚 |𝑀 | } comprises all chunks for all methods, with 𝑆 𝑚𝑖 = {𝑠𝑚  1 , . . . , 𝑠 |𝑆 𝑚𝑖 | } being the chunks in method
                                                                                    𝑖           𝑚𝑖

𝑚𝑖 . We then utilize a text embedding model 𝜎 to vectorize the knowledge text, which results in the Module
Index 𝐼 𝐺 = {𝜎 (𝜅 (𝑔1 )), . . . , 𝜎 (𝜅 (𝑔 |𝐺 | )}, Method Index 𝐼 𝑀 = {𝜎 (𝜅 (𝑚 1 )), . . . , 𝜎 (𝜅 (𝑚 |𝑀 | ))} , and Chunk Index 𝐼 𝑆 =
{𝜎 (𝜅 (𝑆 𝑚1 )), . . . , 𝜎 (𝜅 (𝑆 𝑚 |𝑀 | ))} as shown in Figure 3. Here, 𝜅 maps each program element to its corresponding
knowledge summary extracted by the LLM.
   Next, let 𝑈 = {𝑢𝑖 = (𝑐𝑖 , 𝑓𝑖 , 𝑙𝑖 )|𝑖 = 1, 2, . . . , 𝑁 } denote the multi-granularity queries generated in the Query
Generation phase, where 𝑐, 𝑓 , and 𝑙 are queries respectively corresponding to module-, method-, and chunk-level
suspicious functionalities, 𝑁 is the number of failed test cases. The knowledge base actually maintains three
granularities of knowledge 𝑘𝑚 = (𝜅 (𝜙 (𝑚)), 𝜅 (𝑚), 𝜅 (𝜑 (𝑚))) for each method 𝑚, where 𝜙 : 𝑀 ↦→ 𝐺 maps a method
to the module in which it is located, and 𝜑 : 𝑀 ↦→ 𝑆 maps each method 𝑚 to the set of chunks 𝑆 𝑚𝑖 within that
method. Given the above condition, the retrieval process can be formally described as:
                        𝑀ˆ 𝑖 = {𝑚ˆ 1, . . . , 𝑚ˆ | 𝑀ˆ 𝑖 | } = Retrieve(𝐼 𝑀 , 𝑓𝑖 , 𝜆)                                                               (2)
                        𝐺ˆ𝑖 = {𝑔ˆ1, . . . , 𝑔ˆ|𝐺ˆ𝑖 | } = Retrieve(𝐼𝑝𝐺 , 𝑐𝑖 , 𝜆),       𝐼𝑝𝐺 = {𝜙 (𝑚ˆ 1 ), . . . , 𝜙 (𝑚ˆ | 𝑀ˆ 𝑖 | )}                 (3)
                        𝑆ˆ𝑖 = {ˆ𝑠 1, . . . , 𝑠ˆ|𝑆ˆ𝑖 | } = Retrieve(𝐼𝑝𝑆 , 𝑙𝑖 , 𝜆),   𝐼𝑝𝑆 = 𝜑 (𝑚ˆ 1 ) ∪ · · · ∪ 𝜑 (𝑚ˆ | 𝑀ˆ 𝑖 | )                     (4)
                        𝐸ˆ = {(𝐺ˆ𝑖 , 𝑀ˆ 𝑖 , 𝑆ˆ𝑖 )|𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 }                                                                               (5)
   The Retrieve function measures the semantic similarity between the query and program element summaries
using cosine similarity [48], and returns the suspicious program elements in descending order of similarity. Here,
𝜆 is a hyper-parameter used to control the number of retrieved program elements. Specifically, for each failed
test case, Formula 2 is used to retrieve suspicious methods, while Formulas 3 and 4 are used to retrieve suspicious

                                                                                                                      ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
14   •   Qin et al.


modules and chunks, respectively. Formula 5 denotes the results from all failed test cases. Note that we use the
results from method retrieval 𝑀ˆ 𝑖 to narrow down the size of module and chunk index (𝐼𝑝𝐺 and 𝐼𝑝𝑆 ), which improves
retrieval efficiency by excluding a large number of irrelevant program elements.
   Suspicious Method Voting. After obtaining all retrieved program elements 𝐸ˆ in formula 5, we are supposed
to aggregate the retrieval results from multiple queries and granularities, which finally results in a list of methods
sorted in descending order of suspiciousness. Inspired by the Borda count [13] in social science, we designed a
voting mechanism to elect the more suspicious methods. Our insight is that if a method (including its related
module and chunks) is semantically related to more queries, then this method is more likely to be the actual fault
location. Formally, for the set of all retrieved methods 𝑀 ∗ = 𝑀ˆ 1 ∪ · · · ∪ 𝑀ˆ 𝑁 , the suspicious score of an individual
method 𝑚 ∗ ∈ 𝑀 ∗ is calculated using the following formula:

                                              Õ |𝐺ˆ 𝑖 |
                                              𝑁 Õ                          | 𝑀ˆ 𝑖 |
                                                                         𝑁 Õ
                                                                         Õ                              | 𝑆ˆ𝑖 |
                                                                                                      𝑁 Õ
                                                                                                      Õ
                                        ∗
                             Score(𝑚 ) =                  𝜔 (𝑔ˆ𝑖 𝑗 ) +                𝜔 (𝑚ˆ 𝑖 𝑗 ) +               𝜔 (𝑠ˆ𝑖 𝑗 )   (6)
                                              𝑖=1 𝑗=1                    𝑖=1 𝑗=1                      𝑖=1 𝑗=1
                                                 (
                                                  𝜖 (𝑔ˆ𝑖 𝑗 ), method 𝑚 ∗ belongs to module 𝑔ˆ𝑖 𝑗
                                   𝜔 (𝑔ˆ𝑖 𝑗 ) =                                                                                (7)
                                                   0,          otherwise
                                                 (
                                                  𝜖 (𝑚ˆ 𝑖 𝑗 ), 𝑚 ∗ = 𝑚ˆ 𝑖 𝑗
                                   𝜔 (𝑚ˆ 𝑖 𝑗 ) =                                                                               (8)
                                                   0,           otherwise
                                                 (
                                                  𝜖 (𝑠ˆ𝑖 𝑗 ), chunk 𝑠ˆ𝑖 𝑗 belongs to method 𝑚 ∗
                                    𝜔 (𝑠ˆ𝑖 𝑗 ) =                                                                               (9)
                                                   0,          otherwise

𝜖 is computed during the retrieval process with a value range of [−1, 1], representing the semantic similarity
between a program element and its corresponding query. As shown in Formula 6, the suspiciousness of a method
𝑚 ∗ not only stems from its similarity to method-level queries (calculated by the second term of the formula),
but also from the degree to which the associated module and chunks of the method match to the corresponding
queries (the first and third terms). After obtaining the suspiciousness score for each method 𝑚 ∗ , all methods in
𝑀 ∗ will be ranked in descending order. It is worth noting that due to the combination of the multi-granularity
retrieval mechanism and the cosine similarity-based suspiciousness calculation, we did not find the phenomenon
of ties in suspicious scores in our experiments, thus avoiding additional designs for breaking ties in potential
faulty methods.
   Finally, we follow previous studies [23, 25] to generate an explanations for each localized suspicious method.
Specifically, an LLM is employed to generate an bug explanation by summarizing the fault information and all
products of the CosFL (including the multi-granularity queries and the source code of the retrieved suspicious
method). Although this operation does not directly affect the FL performance of CosFL, the bug explanations
generated by the LLM can help users better evaluate the authenticity of CosFL results.

4 EXPERIMENT
4.1 Research Question
To comprehensively evaluate the performance of CosFL, we design three research questions:
   RQ1: The effectiveness of CosFL. How effective is CosFL in method-level fault localization compared to
other state-of-the-art code navigation-based FL techniques?
   RQ2: The impact of different components in CosFL. We conduct an ablation study to investigate how
different components contribute to the overall performance of CosFL.

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                        Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •   15


                                                      Table 1. Benchmark Information.

                            Project            Name                                    #Bug              LoC             NoM
                            Chart              jfreechart                                 25            207K            14,925
         Defects4J V1.2.0


                            Closure            closure-compiler                          125            123K            18,052
                            Lang               commons-lang                               61             56K             8,325
                            Math               commons-math                               99            164K            20,503
                            Mockito            mockito                                    35             20K             2,522
                            Time               joda-time                                  25             61K             3,993
                            Closure            closure-compiler                           41            123K            18,052
                            Cli                commons-cli                                37              4K             1,400
                            Codec              commons-codec                              15              5K             1,655
                            Collections        commons-collections                         3             61K             5,004
         Defects4J V2.0.0




                            Compress           commons-compress                           44             30K             5,666
                            Csv                commons-csv                                15              2K               592
                            Gson               gson                                       14             10K             1,271
                            JacksonCore        jackson-core                               19             24K             3,889
                            JacksonDatabind    jackson-databind                           39             65K            13,861
                            JacksonXml         jackson-dataformat-xml                      6              6K               523
                            Jsoup              jsoup                                      88              4K             2,964
                            IO                 commons-io                                 22             11K             3,646
                            Validator          commons-validator                          11             16K             1,292
         GrowingBugs




                            Javapoet           javapoet                                   16              1K               139
                            Zip4j              zip4j                                      47              7K             1,442
                            Spoon              spoon                                      16             35K             6,067
                            Markedj            markedj                                    13              2K               168
                            Dagger_core        dagger-core                                19              3K               382
                                              Overall                                   835           1,066K             139K

  RQ3: Effects of different hyper-parameters on CosFL. We explore the sensitivity of CosFL to different
parameter settings.
  RQ4: How is the quality of the queries generated by CosFL? We comprehensively evaluate the quality of
the generated queries through both automated evaluation metrics and manual analysis.


4.2   Benchmark
We design CosFL as an FL approach for localizing general defects within a software repository. Given the test
failure information triggered by a bug as input, CosFL can be used to localize different types of bugs (e.g., crash
bug, runtime exception, or logic error). In order to comprehensively evaluate the effect of CosFL on different
software projects, we adopt a benchmark which consists of 835 real-world bugs from 23 Java projects. Specifically,
we reproduce 691 bugs within 16 open-source Java projects from the widely used software defect benchmark
Defects4J [22] (of which Defects4J V1.2.0 contains 370 bugs from 6 projects, and Defects4J V2.0.0 adds 321 bugs
from 11 projects). Additionally, we collected 144 reproducible bugs of 7 projects from the GrowingBugs [19]
benchmark, which has scarcely been utilized for evaluating the existing FL approaches.
   Table 1 shows the detailed information of the benchmark. The columns “Project” and “Name” represent the
abbreviation and full name of the software project, respectively. The column “#Bug” represents the number of
bugs in the project. “LoC” and “NoM” show the total number of lines of code and the number of methods of the
software project, respectively, where the number of methods does not include methods without bodies such as
abstract methods. Finally, the benchmark we used to conduct the experiments comprises 835 bugs from 23 Java
projects.

                                                                                                         ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
16    •   Qin et al.


4.3       Baseline
We compare CosFL with two state-of-the-art fault localization approaches, AutoFL [23] and AgentFL [39]. Both
of them focus on localizing the fault location from the entire software project through code navigation.
   AutoFL [23] utilizes the function calling capabilities of LLMs for fault localization. Given functions such
as get_class_covered, get_method_covered, and get_code_snippet, the LLM is required to autonomously
decide whether to invoke functions to acquire additional information in each round of dialogue, and gradually
navigating to the buggy location. It is worth noting that AutoFL employs repeated runs to reduce the perplexity
of results. For the sake of fairness, we set the number of runs for all FL tools to 1 in this paper.
   AgentFL [39] defines the fault localization task as a standard operating procedure, which is decomposed into
three steps: fault comprehension, codebase navigation, and fault confirmation. In each step, AgentFL employs
agents capable of utilizing various tools to address specific subtasks. AgentFL incorporates a document-guided
search strategy for codebase navigation, which utilizes both existing documents and LLM-enhanced documents
to identify classes and methods related to the potential root causes.

4.4       Metrics
We use three metrics to evaluate the method-level FL performance:
   Top-N Recall (Top-N). For a single bug version 𝑏 ∈ 𝐵, Top-N indicates whether there is a buggy method
𝑚 ∈ 𝑀 in the first 𝑁 methods of the method ranking list 𝐿 provided by the fault localization approach. For an
                                                                                                                   Í |𝐵 |
entire project, Top-N is equal to the sum of the results of all bug versions. The formula of Top-N is Top-N = 𝑖=1         𝐼𝑖 ,
where 𝐼𝑖 equals to 1 if ∃𝑚 ∈ {𝐿1, 𝐿2, . . . , 𝐿𝑁 }, 𝑚 ∈ 𝑀, or 0 otherwise. In this work, we adopt 𝑁 ∈ {1, 5, 10}. The
higher the Top-N recall, the better the fault localization performance.
   Mean First Rank (MFR). MFR can be used to indicate the ranking of the first buggy method in the method
ranking list. For a single buggy version, MFR is the ranking of the first buggy method in the list. For all buggy
versions in the entire project, MFR is equal to the mean of the results of all buggy versions. The formula of MFR
               Í |𝐵 |
is MFR = |𝐵1 | 𝑖=1    𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖 . If no buggy method is found within the recall set of size 𝑁 , the rank value is assigned to
𝑁 + 1. The lower the MFR, the better the fault localization performance.
   Mean Average Rank (MAR). MAR is utilized to indicate the ranking of all buggy methods in the method
ranking list. For a single buggy version, MFR is the average ranking of all buggy methods in the list. For all buggy
versions in the entire project, MFR is equal to the mean of the results of all buggy versions. The formula of MAR
                   Í |𝐵 | Í |𝑀 |
is MAR = |𝐵 |1|𝑀 | 𝑖=1      𝑗=1 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖 𝑗 . The lower the MAR, the better the fault localization performance.

4.5       Implementation
We implement CosFL based on LlamaIndex [33]. We use ChromaDB [9] as the vector store and tree-sitter [51]
for AST-based parsing and program element extraction. For inspecting software dynamic behavior, we conduct
program instrumentation through a self-implement Java agent [17] and build the dynamic method call graph
on the fly with JGraphT [18]. We set the following alterable parameters for the default version of CosFL. In
Module-Level Knowledge Extraction of Section 3.1, the maximum and minimum module sizes are set to 15 and 5
respectively. The number of retrieved elements in Fault Retrieval of Section 3.3 is set to 𝜆 = 50.
   We choose jina-embeddings-v2-base-en [21] as the default text embedding model. At the time of writing this
paper, the DeepSeek-V2.5 series model had achieved comparable performance to other mainstream general-
purpose LLMs in coding abilities. Our sensitivity analysis in Section 8 also confirms this. Additionally, its cost is
significantly lower than other LLMs, with a price of only approximately 0.14 (0.29) for one million input (output)
tokens, which is less than 10% of the cost of GPT-4o series models. Considering the relatively high computational
resources required to adopt the GPT series model for all LLM-based approaches, we choose to employ DeepSeek-
V2.5-1210 [10] as the LLM backend for CosFL due to its high cost-effectiveness. For a fair comparison, we also

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                         Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •   17


                      Table 2. Results of CosFL and other code navigation based FL approaches.

                              AutoFL                         AgentFL                             CosFL
 Project       Bugs
                      T1 T5 T10   MFR         MAR     T1 T5 T10  MFR            MAR     T1 T5 T10    MFR            MAR
 Chart           25    6  9  9    33.16       34.16   12 18 18    15.40         15.74   15 23 23      4.24           5.04
 Closure        166    3  4  4    49.79       50.39   27 53 61    24.17         24.50   35 61 73     29.34          30.25
 Lang            61   27 31 31    25.67       28.27   38 46 46    13.49         13.61   36 52 55      5.20           5.42
 Math            99   43 56 56    22.90       26.04   48 64 64    18.96         19.11   46 74 75      8.80           9.53
 Mockito         35   15 16 16    28.17       38.89   16 18 18    25.37         25.59   15 23 24     13.60          14.74
 Time            25   10 11 11    29.08       34.25   12 14 14    23.08         23.10    7 13 13     19.16          20.14
 Cli             37    6 10 10    37.25       37.25   12 22 22    21.78         21.96   15 26 30      6.24           7.82
 Codec           15    4  5  5    33.21       33.60    5 12 12    11.80         11.93    6 13 14      3.00           3.84
 Collections      3    0  0  0    50.33       50.33    0  0  0    51.00         51.00    1  1  1     34.33          34.33
 Compress        44   16 20 20    28.45       30.71   17 28 28    19.55         19.55   18 30 33      9.16          10.52
 Csv             15    4  4  4    37.67       41.00    4  5  5    34.47         34.47    9 11 11      5.07           5.37
 Gson            14    4  6  6    29.79       33.87    6  7  7    26.07         26.14    8 11 11      6.64           6.75
 JacksonCore     19    3  6  6    35.47       38.00    7 11 11    22.42         22.73    9 15 15      8.05           8.75
 Jackson-        39    4  5  5    44.54       50.08    4  6  7    42.31         42.32    5 15 16     28.13          28.55
 Databind
 JacksonXml       6    1   1   1     42.50    42.50    1   1   1      42.67     42.67    3   4   4        16.50     16.50
 Jsoup           88   25 25 25       36.75    40.57   21 37 37        30.31     30.34   31 52 56          16.83     17.78
 IO              22   12 18 18       10.36    14.15    0   0   0      51.00     51.00   13 21 21           2.18      2.30
 Validator       11    2   3   3     34.33    34.33    5   9   9      10.45     10.45    8 10 10           5.91      6.16
 Javapoet        16    7   7   7     29.13    30.69   10 14 14         7.63      7.63   12 16 16           1.25      1.66
 Zip4j           47   10 10 10       40.36    42.28    6   8   8      42.62     42.65   15 29 30          14.55     16.09
 Spoon           16    3   3   4     38.81    40.22    2   7   7      29.56     29.56    6   8   9        19.88     20.63
 Markedj         13    0   0   0     51.00    51.00    1   2   2      43.38     43.38    5 11 12           3.31      6.28
 Dagger_core     19    1   3   3     43.11    47.40    2   2   2      45.74     45.74    6 13 14          12.79     15.16
 Total          835   206 253 254    35.78    38.48   256 384 393     26.80     26.90   324 532 566       14.15     14.97

use the same model to reproduce the state-of-the-art approaches AutoFL [23] and AgentFL [39]. To ensure the
scalability of CosFL, we further investigated its FL performance across other mainstream models in Section 5.3.

5 EVALUATION
5.1 RQ1: Effectiveness of CosFL
In Table 2, CosFL is compared with other LLM-based techniques on method-level FL effectiveness. Overall, CosFL
achieves the best performance, which localizes 324, 532, and 566 bugs in the top 1, 5, and 10 positions, respectively.
The MFR is 14.15 and the MAR is 14.97, indicating that CosFL can rank the buggy methods at relatively high
positions. The effect of AgentFL is inferior to CosFL, which localizes 256, 384, and 393 methods in the top 1,
5, and 10 positions, with an MFR of 26.80 and MAR of 26.90. AutoFL performed the worst among the three
approaches, with Top1, Top3, and Top5 scores of 206, 253, and 254, respectively, and MFR of 35.78 and 38.48.
CosFL shows 57.3% and 26.6% increases in Top1 compared to AutoFL and AgentFL, respectively. For the Top5
accuracy, the increases are even more significant, reaching 110.3% and 38.5%. Such results are consistent with our
expectation that the performance of FL techniques is proportional to the amount of software information they can
exploit. Specifically, AutoFL only utilized the most basic information such as the names of the covered classes and
methods; AgentFL further incorporates documentation generated by developers or LLMs, providing more detailed
knowledge about software functionality; CosFL provides the richest information through a software knowledge
base, which supplies runtime information about bugs, offering a basis for more accurate fault localization.




                                                                                          ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
18    •    Qin et al.


   In Figure 7, we present the overlap of Top5 results among dif-                AgentFL                                AutoFL

ferent FL approaches. Particularly, we employed the Top5 metric                                         17
to measure the comprehensive localization performance, as a pre-                           57                      14


vious study [25] indicated that over 70% of practitioners consider
                                                                                                       176
localization results that rank buggy elements within the top five                               134           46
positions to be successful. As shown in the figure, we observe
that the results of CosFL substantially cover the other two, identi-
                                                                                                       176
fying 80.7% (310 out of 384) of the bugs localized by AgentFL and
87.7% (222 out of 253) of AutoFL. Moreover, CosFL independently                                       CosFL
finds 176 bugs, which illustrates the effectiveness of boosting FL
through semantic code search.                                                   Fig. 7. Overlap of Top5 results.

Answer to RQ1: CosFL shows superior performance in fault localization by ranking 324 (532) out of 835 bugs
within the top 1 (5) positions, significantly outperforming other LLM-based methods.

5.2       RQ2: Ablation Study
To evaluate the contribution of different components in CosFL, we designed three variants:
          • w/o Module Context: This variant removes the 1a Module Level knowledge extraction phase in 1
            Software Knowledge Base Construction phase of Figure 3, thereby impacting both the 2 Query Generation
            and 3 Fault Retrieval phases: (1) For the Query Generation phase, this modification deprives the LLM of
            access to internal software information via the knowledge base, making it degrade to generate queries
            based on merely the raw fault information (e.g., test output and error stack trace); (2) This variant also
            indirectly impacts the accuracy of the method and chunk retrieval process within the Fault Retrieval
            phase. Specifically, in the 1b Method+Chunk Level knowledge extraction phase, the absence of the
            Module Summary further prevents the LLM from obtaining relevant functional module information when
            extracting knowledge at the method and chunk levels.
          • w/o Module Retrieval: This variant eliminates module-level retrieval in the 3 Fault Retrieval phase,
            which aims to investigate the role of module-level knowledge in retrieving buggy methods.
          • w/o Chunk Retrieval: This variant excludes chunk-level retrieval in the 3 Fault Retrieval phase, which
            aims to investigate the role of finer-grained chunk-level knowledge in retrieving buggy methods.
   The effectiveness of each variant is presented in Table 3. In the first row of the table, we observe that module-
level knowledge has a significant impact on CosFL. Interestingly, after removing the module context, the Top1
value drops sharply by 80, while the Top5 remains relatively unchanged and the Top10 even increases slightly by
32. To better understand this phenomenon, we manually investigate the results of the variant w/o Module Context.
We find that the module-level knowledge exerts an important influence on CosFL from two aspects: On the one
hand, module-level software knowledge prompts LLM to generate queries that better match the semantics of
the faulty functionality, which helps CosFL rank the buggy methods at a higher position and leads to a huge
difference on the Top1 metric; On the other hand, the richer information provided by module knowledge increases
the certainty of CosFL, allowing it to generate more specific queries. The reduction in ambiguity somewhat
narrows the search scope, decreasing the likelihood of a small fraction of bugs being localized within Top10. From
rows 2 to 3, we can see that both module- and chunk-granularity retrieval enhance the effectiveness of CosFL,
contributing respectively to Top1 improvements of 12 and 19, and Top10 improvements of 9 and 23. Notably, the
chunk-level retrieval plays a more critical role, offering an MRR contribution of 1.02, in contrast to 0.40 from
module retrieval. This indicates that subtle variations in the detailed chunks between different methods can serve
as a valid basis for determining the fault location.

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                                                        Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •                                            19


                                                                              Table 3. Ablation study results.

                        Project            Bugs     Variants                                 Top1           Top5              Top10                   MFR                 MAR
                                                    w/o Module Context                     244 ↓ 80       531 ↓ 1            598 ↑ 32             14.38 ↑ 0.23        15.15 ↑ 0.18
                         Overall           835      w/o Module Retrieval                   312 ↓ 12       519 ↓ 13           557 ↓ 9              14.68 ↑ 0.53        15.37 ↑ 0.40
                                                    w/o Chunk Retrieval                    305 ↓ 19       509 ↓ 23           543 ↓ 23             15.15 ↑ 1.00        15.99 ↑ 1.02
                                                    Default CosFL                             324            532                566                   14.15               14.97




             gpt-4o (OpenAI)                               voyage-large-2 (Voyage)                                                Retrieval 25                                    Module Size 0-10
             deepseek V2.5                                 embeddings-v2-base-en (Jina)                                           Retrieval 50                                    Module Size 5-15
             gpt-3.5-turbo (OpenAI)                        text-embedding-3-large (OpenAI)                                        Retrieval 75                                    Module Size 10-20
                 LLM Backend                                     Embedding Model                                Retrieve Methods Amount                                           Module Size
                        T1                                                   T1                                                    T1                                                   T1
                        342                                                  339                                                   339                                                  339
                        317                                                  326                                                   326                                                  318
T5                      292
                                                 T10 T5                      313
                                                                                                      T10 T5                       313
                                                                                                                                                            T10 T5                      297
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T10
     558                                   596            540                                   581            546                                    575            548                                   576
           521                      544                         533                      568                         530                       560                         522                      564
                  484         492                                      526         555                                      514          545                                      496         552

                    32.4 32.8                                            35.2 34.2                                            34.4 33.7                                             34.4 34.1
                 34.6          34.6                                   36.0          35.2                                   35.4           34.7                                   35.3          34.8
           36.8                     36.4                        36.8                     36.2                        36.4                      35.7                        36.2                     35.5
      50-MFR                          50-MAR              50-MFR                           50-MAR              50-MFR                            50-MAR              50-MFR                           50-MAR

                                                     Fig. 8. The impact of different hyper-parameters on CosFL.

Answer to RQ2: All components have contributed to the fault localization performance of CosFL, among which
the module-level knowledge has exerted a relatively more significant impact.



5.3        RQ3: Sensitivity Analysis
Figure 8 illustrates the performance of CosFL under different hyper-parameter settings, where the red line
represents the default settings. Regarding the LLM Backend, we observe that LLMs with varying capabilities
significantly impact CosFL’s performance. For instance, CosFL (gpt-3.5-turbo) ranked 290 and 471 bugs in the
Top1 and Top5, respectively. However, with the more powerful LLM gpt-4o, the Top1 and Top5 dramatically
increased by 29 and 56. For LLMs with similar capacities, such as deepseek V2.5 and gpt-4o, the performance
variation of CosFL is negligible. Concerning the Embedding Model, we notice that CosFL’s performance
remained stable across different series of embedding models (i.e., Jina [21], Voyage [52], and OpenAI [36]). The
performance differences introduced by text-embedding-3-large and voyage-large-2 did not exceed 2% across all
metrics. For Retrieve Methods Amount, the performance of CosFL improves as the retrieved methods amount
𝜆 increases from 25 to 50, with gains of 14 and 19 in Top5 and Top10, respectively. However, as 𝜆 further increases
from 50 to 75, the performance nearly plateaus. This indicates that setting 𝜆 at a moderate level is enough to fully
harness CosFL’s capabilities. Finally, we investigated the performance of CosFL under different Module Size
parameters. The results demonstrate that both larger (module size ranges from 10 to 20) and smaller (0 to 10)
module sizes somewhat diminished CosFL’s performance. This suggests that extracting module-level knowledge
of moderate size is important to fully leverage CosFL’s potential, which further confirms the rationality of the
Module Size Optimization operation we introduced in Section 3.1.

                                                                                                                                                              ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
20    •    Qin et al.


                                                   Table 4. Results of the query quality evaluation.

                                                                      Embedding Similarity
                                                     Granularity                𝑅𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡      𝑅𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑡           𝑂𝑚𝑎𝑥       𝑂𝑚𝑖𝑛        𝑆𝑚𝑎𝑥
                                                       Module                    3.85        7.32          0.8014     0.7835     0.8099
                        Individual ∗                   Method                    4.13        7.32          0.8237     0.8058     0.8393
                                                       Chunk                     4.39        7.83          0.8378     0.8176     0.8545
                                                       Module                    3.24        6.42          0.8045     0.7842     0.8115
                        Grouped †                      Method                    3.07        6.81          0.8255     0.8046     0.8434
                                                       Chunk                     3.31        7.14          0.8412     0.8190     0.8566
                                                                        Human Analysis
                                                           Granularity                    Total        Complete     Concise    Relevant
                                                             Module                                          94         126         113
                        Individual ∗                         Method                        144              137         122         115
                                                             Chunk                                          140         125         108
                                                             Module                                          54          77          70
                        Grouped †                            Method                         86               80          74          73
                                                             Chunk                                           83          76          72
                                                                         LLM Judgment
                                                           Granularity                    Total        Complete     Concise    Relevant
                                                             Module                                           9         143         132
                        Individual ∗                         Method                        144              107         143         126
                                                             Chunk                                          143         116         118
                                                             Module                                           9          86          82
                        Grouped †                            Method                         86               68          85          77
                                                             Chunk                                           86          76          75
                        † Denotes the results grouped by bug (a bug may correspond to multiple queries).
                        ∗ Denotes the results for individual queries.



Answer to RQ3: CosFL shows stable performance under backend models of the same capability levels. By setting
appropriate retrieve methods amount, the potential of CosFL can be further unleashed.

5.4       RQ4: Query Quality
The Query Generation (Section 3.2) phase in CosFL is critical, where the LLM analyzes root causes with the
knowledge provided by the Software Knowledge Base and generates multi-granularity queries to search for
buggy methods. In this RQ, we aim to perform a comprehensive evaluation of the quality of the queries generated
by CosFL. Based on a 95% confidence level and a 10% confidence interval [1], we randomly sample 86 out of
835 bugs as the sample set for this research question. Since a single bug can trigger multiple failed tests and
CosFL would generate three queries in different granularities (i.e., module-, method-, and chunk-level) for each
failed test, the number of queries at each level in this RQ is 144. We comprehensively evaluate the query quality
through three evaluation approaches, including Embedding Similarity, Human Analysis, and LLM Judgment:
   Embedding Similarity. Embedding models can map textual data into a continuous vector space, thereby
enabling the objective measurement of semantic similarity between texts by calculating the distances between
their corresponding vectors. Intuitively, a better query should be more semantically similar to the buggy program
element. For each bug, we use jina-embedding-v2-base-en as the embedding model to vectorize the query
generated by CosFL and the source code of the buggy methods (Note that a single bug may be caused by multiple
buggy methods). We then assess query quality by measuring the cosine similarity [44] between these embeddings.
Given a embedded query 𝑞 ∈ R𝐸 for a bug (where 𝑀 is the dimension of a embedding), the embedded buggy
methods matrix 𝑀 𝑞 ∈ R𝑁 ×𝐸 (where 𝑁 is the number of buggy methods for the bug), and the cosine similarity
vector for the query 𝑠 𝑞 ∈ R𝑁 (where 𝑠𝑖 = (𝑞𝑀𝑇 )𝑖 /k𝑞kk𝑀𝑖 k), we design the following five metrics:
                                        𝑞


          • 𝑂𝑚𝑎𝑥 : the average max Q-Buggy Scores (i.e., the similarity scores between each query and the buggy
                                          Í144
            methods), calculated by 𝑂𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 𝑘=1 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑠 𝑞𝑘 ). This metric evaluates the maximum semantic similarity
            between the query and buggy methods. The larger the 𝑂𝑚𝑎𝑥 , the better the query quality.

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                             Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •              21


                       Queries                                         Buggy Methods                              Human Assigned Labels
  Module-Level                                           Method 1
  The bug likely resides in the MathUtils class,
                                                         public static boolean equals(                   Module-Level:
  specifically within the equals method.                                                                                            Concise   Relevant
                                                                 double x, double y) {
   Method-Level                                            return (Double.isNaN(x) && Double.isNaN(y))
   The equals method is not correctly handling the             || x == y;
   comparison of arrays containing NaN values.           }                                               Method-Level:   Complete   Concise   Relevant
   Chunk-Level                                           Method 2
  The buggy code may be using a direct equality check
  (==) for NaN values, which always returns false. The                        ...
                                                                                                         Chunk-Level:    Complete   Concise   Relevant
  correct approach should be to use Double.isNaN() to
  check for NaN values.                                                       ...




Fig. 9. An example questionnaire for human query quality evaluation. Given the Queries and the Buggy Methods, the
participants are required to measure the queries on three criteria and assign three kinds of labels (i.e., Complete, Concise,
and Relevant) to each query in Human Assigned Labels.

      • 𝑂𝑚𝑖𝑛 : the average min Q-Buggy Scores. The larger the 𝑂𝑚𝑖𝑛 , the better the query quality.
      • 𝑆𝑚𝑎𝑥 : the average max Q-All Scores (i.e., the similarity scores between each query and all of the methods
        in the codebase). This metric can be used to investigate whether a query is more similar to buggy methods
        than other methods in the code repository.
      • 𝑅𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 : the average rank of the max Q-buggy Scores among all Q-All Scores. This metric can be used to
        illustrate the potential best code search performance of a query. The smaller the 𝑅𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 , the better the query
        quality.
      • 𝑅𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑡 : the average rank of the min Q-buggy Scores among all Q-All Scores. The smaller the 𝑅𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑡 , the
        better the query quality.
   The result is shown in Table 4 under the subtitle Embedding Similarity. Note that since CosFL may generate
multiple queries for a bug, we also show the results grouped by bug to evaluate the comprehensive performance
of query quality in the FL process. Overall, we observed that the queries generated by CosFL exhibit significantly
higher semantic similarity to the buggy methods compared to their similarity with other methods in the codebase.
When grouped by bug, method-level queries can rank buggy methods within the range of 3.07 to 6.81 among
hundreds of candidate methods. For individual queries, we found that as the query granularity goes finer (ranging
from Module, Method, to Chunk), the similarity score progressively increases (the 𝑂𝑚𝑎𝑥 rises from 0.8014 to
0.8237 to 0.8378) but the ranking of buggy methods correspondingly decreases (the 𝑅𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 drops from 3.85 to 4.13
to 4.39). This phenomenon is attributed to the characteristics of queries at different granularities. Specifically,
finer-grained queries provide a more detailed description of the possible problematic functionality, enhancing
their semantic similarity to all methods in the codebase. Nonetheless, this increase in overall similarity may
reduce the particularity of the query’s semantic association with the buggy methods, thereby leading to a decline
in relative ranking.
   Human Analysis. Based on the existing bug explanation and query evaluation researches [23, 60], we evaluate
the query quality on the following three criteria:
      • Complete: the query contains a detailed description of the possible faulty functionality, rather than simply
        explaining the error message.
      • Concise: the query succinctly describes the possible faulty functionality, without extraneous content.
      • Relevant: the possible faulty functionality described in the query semantically matches at least one of the
        buggy methods.
We recruited six graduate students with more than 5 years of programming experience as participants. For each
bug, the participant is asked to manually label the query with the above criteria by filling out the questionnaire
in the format of Figure 9. We present the result in Table 4 under the subtitle Human Analysis.

                                                                                                                 ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
22   •   Qin et al.


     Prompt 4: Query Quality Evaluation

     # Context
     You will be presented with three levels of query text describing potential faulty functionalities in a software:
       - Module Query: Indicates which modules or classes may contain faulty code.
       - Method Query: Refers to specific methods that might be buggy.
       - Chunk Query: Describes the detailed logic that might cause the bug.
     # Task
     Given a list of Buggy Methods (i.e., source code of methods with known bugs), evaluate the quality of each Query
     and annotate each with zero, one, or more of the following labels:
        - Complete: The query provides a detailed description of potentially faulty functionality, not just a restatement of
     an error message.
        - Concise: The query expresses the faulty functionality clearly and without unnecessary content.
        - Relevant: The described functionality in the query semantically matches at least one of the Buggy Methods.
     # Output Format
     Your final output must be in JSON format, for example:
     {
        ”module_query”: [”Complete”, ”Concise”, ”Relevant”],
        ”method_query”: [”Concise”, ”Relevant”],
        ”chunk_query”: []
     }
     # Input
     Module Query:<Module-Level Query Text>
     Method Query:<Method-Level Query Text>
     Chunk Query:<Chunk-Level Query Text>
     Buggy Methods:<Source Code of the Buggy Methods>


   Overall, we find that all three granularities of queries possess high relevance with the buggy methods. For
example, the participants labeled about 80% (115 out of 144) of the method-level queries as Relevant. For the result
grouped by bug, the participants ensured that at least one relevant method-level query is generated for 85% (73
out of 86) of the bugs. This result confirms the effectiveness of CosFL in generating high-quality queries. In terms
of the Concise criteria, we observe that most of the queries were deemed concise by the participants, highlighting
the strong capability of LLMs in generating queries without redundant information. Regarding the Complete
criterion, we notice that the number of queries marked as Complete gradually decreases as the granularity
changes from fine-grained to coarse-grained. For individual results, the number of queries labeled as Complete for
chunk-, method-, and module-level granularity are 140, 137, and 94, respectively. This phenomenon aligns with
the intended design of queries at different levels. As shown in Figure 9, module-level queries typically describe
potentially problematic classes or functional modules. Therefore, these queries often fail to meet the Complete
criterion in “containing a detailed description of the possible faulty functionality”. In contrast, method-level and
chunk-level queries tend to provide a more detailed description of the erroneous functionality, making them
more likely to be categorized as Complete.
   LLM Judgment. To mitigate the influence of subjectivity in manual evaluation, we further employed an LLM
to assess the quality of the queries. Specifically, we adopted the same criteria used in the human analysis and
classified the queries using the gemini-2.5-flash-preview reasoning model. The prompt template for the LLM
evaluator is shown in Prompt 4. We present the result in Table 4 under the subtitle LLM Judgment. Overall, the
evaluation results of LLM are consistent with human analysis, as most of the queries are semantically related to
at least one buggy method. For instance, 88% (126 out of 144) of method-level queries were labeled as “Relevant”
by the LLM. For the result grouped by bug, CosFL is capable of generating at least one useful method-level query
for 90% (77 out of 86) of the bugs. Interestingly, we observed that while the overall trends align with human

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                                                    Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •                                    23


                                    Failed Test Case                                                       Exception Trace                                              Test Output
   public void testMethodInference6() throws Exception {
                                                                                    junit.framework.AssertionFailedError: unexpected warnings(s):
     testTypes("/** @constructor */ function F() {}" +
                                                                                    at Assert.fail(Assert.java:47)                                          JSC_WRONG_ARGUMENT_COU
       "/** @param {number} x */ "+
                                                                                    at TypeCheckTest.testTypes(TypeCheckTest.java:9534)                     NT. Function G.prototype.foo: called
       "F.prototype.foo = function(x) { };" +
                                                                                    at TypeCheckTest.testTypes(TypeCheckTest.java:9508)                     with 1 argument(s). Function requires
       "/** @constructor \* @extends {F} */ " +
                                                                                    at TypeCheckTest.testType(TypeCheckTest.java:9446)                      at least 0 argument(s) and no more
       "function G() {}" +
                                                                                    at TypeCheckTest.testTypes(TypeCheckTest.java:9442)                     than 0 argument(s).
       "/** @override */ G.prototype.foo = function() { };" +
                                                                                    at TypeCheckTest.testMethodInference6(TypeCheckTest.java:2027)
       "(new G()).foo(1);");}

     AgentFL                                                                               Fault Information                                                                                CosFL
  The type checker is not handling the type mismatch between the overridden                                   Provide information about the component responsible for type checking and method
  method and the original method as expected ......                                                           inference in the JavaScript compiler. Specifically, details on how the system handles
  The defect likely lies in the `TypeCheck` class or related classes that handle                              method overrides and argument count validation during type.
  method override type checking, where the loose type checking rules are not being
  correctly applied.
                                                                                                           Module Knowledge
                                                                                                Tool   Title: Function Type Inference and Parameter Handling
                      | Index | Class Name | Class Documentation |                                     Summary: This module focuses on the inference and handling of function types and
                      ...                                                                              parameters within a JavaScript type registry system ...
                      | 32 | JSTypeRegistry | This class is used to resolve named types ... |          Findings: Central Role of inferFromOverriddenFunction This method plays a central,
                      | 33 | TypeCheck | Checks the types of JS expressions ... |                      serving as the primary mechanism for inferring function types from overridden functions ...
                      | 34 | TypedScopeCreator | Creates the symbol table of variables ... |
     AgentFL                                                                                                                                                           Multi-Granular Query
  Given the nature of the issue and the classes listed, the class that stands out as the               Module-Level Query: The bug likely resides in the component responsible for function type
  most suspicious is: #com.google.javascript.jscomp.TypeCheck#                                         inference and parameter handling.
                                                                                                Tool
                                                                                                       Method-Level Query: The method responsible for inferring function types from overridden
       | Method Name | Method Comment |                                                                functions, which is not correctly handling the parameter count ...
       | 6 | shouldTraverse(NodeTraversal,Node,Node) | This method checks if the node                  Chunk-Level Query: The buggy code is likely not properly updating or checking the
       should be traversed, updates the no-type-check section status and reports any issues ... |      parameter count when a function is overridden. It may be assuming that the overridden
       | 7 | visit(NodeTraversal,Node,Node) | This method visits various types of nodes and            function will always have the same parameter count, or it may be failing to account for the
       performs type checking, updates type statistics and ... | ...                                   possibility that the overridden function could have a different parameter signature ...

                                                ...                                                                                                ...
      Buggy Method                                                                                         Buggy Method
  The method #visit(NodeTraversal,Node,Node)# is the most suspicious and likely the                    The method #inferFromOverriddenFunction# is highly suspicious for several reasons.
  root cause of the test failures. It is responsible for the core type checking logic ...              it directly deals with the inference of function types and parameters ...




Fig. 10. Comparison between AgentFL and CosFL in localizing bug Closure-41. The keywords that AgentFL and CosFL focus
on are marked in gold and red , respectively.

analysis results, the LLM appears to be more “rigorous” for the Complete criteria and more “lenient” for the
Concise criteria. For instance, LLMs only categorize 6% (9 out of 144) of the module-level queries as Complete,
yet almost all of them (143 out of 144) are labeled as Concise.

Answer to RQ4: The queries generated by CosFL have a high semantic relevance to the buggy code. The human
analysis shows that about 80% of the method-level queries are semantically relevant to the buggy methods; for 85%
of the bugs, at least one useful query is generated.

6 DISCUSSION
6.1 Case Study
To help understand how the workflow of CosFL differs from other FL approaches, we further demonstrate two
specific cases. In the first case, we compare CosFL with AgentFL [39] to demonstrate the CosFL’s ability to inspect
the internal logic of the software by requesting module-level knowledge. In the second case, the comparison
between CosFL and AutoFL [23] indicates the superiority of semantic code search in expanding search scope.
   Case 1: Better Fault Understanding. In Figure 10, we illustrate the different workflow of AgentFL and CosFL
in localizing the bug Closure-41.2 The cause of this bug is that the software throws an unexpected exception when
performing a type check on the overridden function G.prototype.foo. To fix this issue, the developers modified the
inferFromOverriddenFunction method within the FunctionTypeBuilder class, adding logic to enhance the parameter

2 https://storage.googleapis.com/google-code-archive/v2/code.google.com/closure-compiler/issues/issue-368.json



                                                                                                                                                     ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
24      •    Qin et al.


                                     Failed Test Case                                                                                       Exception Trace
      public void handlesTextAfterData() {                                                                    junit.framework.AssertionFailedError:
        String h = "<html><body>pre <script>inner</script> aft</body></html>";                                               expected:<...dy>pre <script>inner[</script> aft]</body></html>>
        Document doc = Jsoup.parse(h);                                                                                       but was:<...dy>pre <script>inner[ aft</script>]</body></html>>
        assertEquals(                                                                                         at org.junit.Assert.assertEquals(Assert.java:123)
          "<html><head></head><body>pre <script>inner</script> aft</body></html>",                            at org.junit.Assert.assertEquals(Assert.java:145)
          TextUtil.stripNewlines(doc.html())); }                                                              at org.jsoup.parser.ParserTest.handlesTextAfterData(ParserTest.java:138)

         AutoFL                                                                            Fault Information                                                                                    CosFL
     Start by calling the `get_failing_tests_covered_classes` function.                                       Provide information about the component responsible for parsing HTML content and
                                                                                          Function            handling text nodes within the <script> tags. Specifically, details on how the parser
                     The failing test `ParserTest.handlesTextAfterData()` covers several classes,             processes text nodes after script tags and any related logic for handling text content ...
                     including `org.jsoup.nodes.Document`, `org.jsoup.Jsoup`, and                          Module Knowledge
                     `org.jsoup.parser.Parser`. As the test calls `Jsoup.parse(h)` and `doc.html()`,
                     most likely the issue lies in either the `parse()` method of the `Jsoup` class    Title: Function HTML Document Parsing and Node Creation
                     or the `html()` method of the `Document` class.                                   Summary: This module focuses on the creation and manipulation of HTML document ...
         AutoFL                                                                                        Findings: Parser method as the entry point for HTML parsing ...
     Now, let's call the `get_failing_tests_covered_methods_for_class` function
     for the `org.jsoup.nodes.Document` class to get the list of methods in this                                                                                          Multi-Granular Query
     class that are covered by the failing test.                                                       Module-Level Query: The bug likely resides in the component responsible for parsing and
                                                                                          Function     handling HTML elements, specifically the interaction between TextNode and DataNode.
                    The execution path in `org.jsoup.nodes.Document` class includes methods            Method-Level Query: The method responsible for handling text nodes and data nodes in the
                    `normalise()`, `normalise(org.jsoup.nodes.Element)`,                               HTML parsing process is not correctly managing the placement of text after script tags ...
                    `Document(java.lang.String)`, `body()` ...                                         Chunk-Level Query: The buggy code is likely not properly handling the text content that
         AutoFL                                                                                        follows a script tag. It may be incorrectly appending the text content to the script tag itself
     Let's get the code snippet for the `org.jsoup.nodes.Document.normalise()`                         instead of placing it after the script tag in the document hierarchy. This could be due to an
     method by calling the `get_code_snippet` function."                                               incorrect parsing state or a misinterpretation of the HTML structure ...

                                                  ...                                                                                                ...
         Buggy Method                                                                                      Buggy Method
     The methods #Document.normalise()#, #Jsoup.parse(String)# are the most                            The method #parseStartTag# is highly suspicious. The method contains logic for
     suspicious and likely the root cause of the test failures ...                                     handling data nodes within specific tags like 'textarea' and 'script' ...




Fig. 11. Comparison between AutoFL and CosFL in localizing bug Jsoup-2. The keywords that AutoFL and CosFL focus on
are marked in gold and red , respectively.

checking of the function. In this instance, since AgentFL can only start from the provided Fault Information, it is
restricted to focusing on the TypeCheckTest class which repeatedly appears in the Exception Trace, leading to
the erroneous inference that “The defect likely lies in the TypeCheck class.” This inference governs the follow-up
localization process, misleading AgentFL to identify an unexpected method as buggy. Conversely, to gain a deeper
understanding of the root cause, CosFL starts with asking “provide information about the component responsible
for type checking and method inference” to obtain relevant module knowledge. The returned Module Knowledge
highlights that the method inferFromOverriddenFunction “serves as the primary mechanism for inferring function
types from overridden functions”. This discovery guides CosFL to the accurate fault location.
   Case 2: Larger Search Scope. In Figure 11, we compare the different behaviors of AutoFL and CosFL in
localizing the bug Jsoup-2 3 . The issue is caused by the routine that greedily parses the data content not cleaning
up the stack. To fix this, the developers changed the parseStartTag method within class org.jsoup.parser.Parser. In
this case, we observe that the failure of AutoFL originates from its selection of suspicious classes. Specifically,
during the first Function call, AutoFL assesses that “most likely the issue lies in either the Jsoup class or Document
class”, which results in the actual buggy class Parser being overlooked. Subsequently, as indicated in the third
dialogue box on the left side of the figure, AutoFL further requests to “get the list of methods in Document class
that are covered by the failing test”, exacerbating the error and ultimately preventing AutoFL from identifying
the expected buggy method. In contrast, when referring to CosFL, we observe that although Module Knowledge
did not provide any useful context in this instance, semantic code search played a crucial role. By focusing on
software functionalities related to “data node” and “script tag”, CosFL successfully matched the buggy method


3 https://github.com/jhy/jsoup/issues/22



ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                       Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •   25


parseStartTag from the whole code base through code search, as the method “contains logic for handling data
nodes within specific tags”.

6.2   Comparison with Traditional FL Techniques
We also compared CosFL with other traditional FL
techniques. These contain the spectrum-based tech-                  Table 5. Results on Defects4J V2.0.0.
nique Ochiai [2] and various learning-based FL tech-
niques, including FLUCCS [46] based on machine                    # Bugs Techniques Top1 Top3 Top5
learning, DeepFL [28] based on deep learning, and                          Ochiai         32     74     93
                                                                           FLUCCS         57     97    119
GRACE [34] based on graph neural networks. Par-                     280
                                                                           DeepFL         43     89    112
ticularly, to align with practical application scenar-                     GRACE          85    119    140
ios, we focused on the cross-project performance of                         CosFL        105    137    178
the learning-based approaches (i.e., trained on the De-
fects4J V1.2.0 benchmark [22] and tested on V2.0.0). As shown in Table 5, CosFL ranked 105 buggy methods in
the first position, which is 73 more than Ochiai, 48 more than FLUCCS, 43 more than DeepFL, and 20 more than
GRACE. On the Top3 and Top5 metrics, CosFL also consistently outperforms other FL approaches. This indicates
the substantial potential of employing semantic code search for fault localization.

6.3   Cost Analysis
Time and API usage costs are critical concerns for practitioners when using LLM-based FL systems. Therefore,
we recorded the execution time and API usage of CosFL at each step, the results are shown in Figure 12. Overall,
CosFL spends an average of 144.5 seconds and $0.076 to locate a bug. As a comparison, existing research [7]
found that practitioners spend an average of 32 minutes to diagnose a bug, which indicates that applying CosFL
would significantly help developers save their time costs. Particularly, we observed that the cost incurred during
the knowledge base construction phase (i.e., Module-Level, Method & Chunk Level, and Embedding) is relatively
high, taking an average of 126.3 seconds and $0.074 for a bug. In contrast, during the fault localization process
(i.e., Query Generation and Fault Retrieval), CosFL requires only an average of 12.7 seconds and $0.0022 to find
a fault location. It is worth noting that in practical software development scenarios, we do not need to rebuild
the knowledge base from scratch each time; instead, we can incrementally update its content along with the
software life cycle. Therefore, we consider the relatively high cost of the initial knowledge base construction to
be acceptable.

6.4   Threats to Validity
Internal. The main internal threat comes from the data leakage problem. The knowledge about the Defects4J [22]
and the GrowingBugs [19] benchmark may have been included in the LLM training corpus. To mitigate this
threat as much as possible, we ensure that the input provided to the LLM does not contain any project name,
bug ID, or human-written bug report related to a particular bug. Additionally, we conduct a fair comparison
between CosFL and other LLM-based FL techniques using the same LLM backend on the identical benchmark.
The evaluation results demonstrate the superiority of our approach.
  External. Our evaluation of CosFL primarily focuses on software projects with Java unit tests. Our findings
may not be generalizable to other programming languages or different levels of testing. To mitigate this threat,
we adhered to the principle of scalability when implementing CosFL. Specifically, we adopted a common software
hierarchy division (e.g., Module, Method, and Chunk) in the design of CosFL, which ensures that CosFL can be
easily extended to other object-oriented programming languages such as Python and C++.

                                                                                        ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
26       •       Qin et al.


                                                                           ( [ H F X W L R Q  7 L P H                                                                                                  $ 3 ,  8 V D J H
                      0 R G X O H  / H Y H O                                                                                     0 R G X O H  / H Y H O

      0 H W K R G  	  & K X Q N  / H Y H O                                                                    0 H W K R G    & K X Q N  / H Y H O

                          ( P E H G G L Q J                                                                                          ( P E H G G L Q J

              4 X H U \  * H Q H U D W L R Q                                                                             4 X H U \  * H Q H U D W L R Q

                    ) D X O W  5 H W U L H Y D O                                                                              ) D X O W  5 H W U L H Y D O

                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                              7 L P H   V H F R Q G V                                                                                              & R V W   î   3  8 6 ' 

                                                         (a) Execution time by step.                                                                                                     (b) API usage by step.

Fig. 12. Cost analysis results. Module Level, Method & Chunk Level, and Embedding are the three stages of Software
Knowledge Base Construction in Fig. 3.

6.5            Limitation and Future Work
While CosFL demonstrates promising initial results, it is important to acknowledge several limitations that
require further investigation.
   Reliance on Query Quality. The effectiveness of CosFL heavily relies on the quality of the queries generated
by the LLM. The LLM’s ability to accurately understand the error message and formulate relevant search queries
is crucial. Factors such as the complexity of the root cause, as well as the LLM’s training data and inherent biases,
could impact the quality of the generated queries, leading to suboptimal localization in some cases. To address
this, future research can focus on generating better queries. This could involve exploring different prompting
techniques, fine-tuning the LLM on the FL task, or incorporating a context collection agent to guide the LLM in
creating more precise and effective queries.
   The Accuracy of Code Search Techniques. Our current approach assumes that the top results returned by
the code search are indeed the buggy methods. However, in complex software systems, a large number of program
elements may exhibit functional similarities, which makes it difficult to ensure that the retrieved methods are
directly associated with the actual faulty location. To improve the reliability of our method, future efforts should
focus on enhancing the effectiveness of the code search. This could involve utilizing rerank techniques [62],
employing static analysis techniques to confirm the presence of the error in the identified code, or incorporating
an LLM to further confirm the relevance between the queries and the suspicious methods.
   Handling of Complex and Distributed Errors. Our method currently focuses on localizing buggy methods.
However, many software errors might involve multiple interacting components or be distributed across several
methods, which our current approach may struggle to pinpoint. Future work could aim at extending our approach
to complex error scenarios. This might involve analyzing relationships between methods, tracking data flow, or
incorporating techniques like program slicing to identify the interconnected components involved in a bug.
   Support for more programming languages. CosFL currently focuses on fault localization for Java projects.
There are two primary reasons: (1) Toolchain Support for Program Analysis: Our approach involves program
instrumentation and the construction of dynamic method call graphs. The Java ecosystem offers a more extensive
toolchain for these specific types of program analysis. This supports a more straightforward implementation
and reliable data collection for our methodology in its current stage of development. (2) Object-Oriented Char-
acteristics: Java’s design as a statically-typed, object-oriented language aligns well with the “multi-granularity
code search” aspect of our method. While Python is also object-oriented, Java’s stricter adherence to certain
object-oriented principles and its more explicit class and method structures provided a clearer framework for


ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                           Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •   27


evaluating our approach. In our future work, we plan to extend our evaluation to include projects developed in
other languages, such as Python, to assess the generalizability and potential adaptations required for CosFL.

7 RELATED WORK
7.1 Early Fault Localization Techniques
Fault localization (FL) is a crucial component of software debugging and has been extensively studied. To help
developers automatically find the fault locations in the entire code base, early FL techniques including Spectrum-
based FL (SBFL) [2, 3, 57], Mutation-based FL (MBFL) [58], and Information Retrieval-based FL (IRFL) [54].
   SBFL identifies potentially faulty program elements by assuming that the fault locations are more frequently
executed by failing test cases than by passing ones. To implement SBFL, coverage data is gathered for each
program element 𝑒, specifically noting how many passing tests 𝑇𝑝 (𝑒) and failing tests 𝑇𝑓 (𝑒) execute each element.
Various formulas are then applied to determine the suspiciousness scores that rank these elements accordingly.
Some of the commonly used formulas include Ochiai [2], Jaccard [3], and DStar [57].
   MBFL aims to enhance FL techniques by integrating impact information. Given that code elements executed by
passing or failing tests might not influence the test results, MBFL utilizes mutation testing to mimic the impact
of individual code elements for more accurate fault identification. Metallaxis [37], the first generalized MBFL
method, is predicated on the intuition that if a mutant affects failing tests (i.e., the test result changes from fail to
pass after mutation), the corresponding code element might be responsible for the test failures. Conversely, if
a mutant affects passing tests, the associated code element is less likely to be faulty. Metallaxis then employs
traditional SBFL formulas to determine the suspiciousness of each mutant. The highest suspiciousness score
among mutants is then assigned as the suspiciousness of the related code element.
   IRFL has emerged within the realm of fault location by leveraging a few selected bug reports. One notable
method is BugLocator introduced by Zhou et al. [65], which employs an information retrieval approach to identify
files pertinent to bug fixes. This method enhances the VSM model by adjusting the ranks based on the information
from previously fixed similar bugs. Saha et al. [42] present BLUiR, which discovers that structured information
retrieval based on code constructs can significantly improve FL effectiveness.
   Early FL technologies had certain limitations. Specifically, SBFL and MBFL typically calculate the suspiciousness
of fault locations through statistical analysis, without considering the semantics of the program itself. The IRFL
largely depend on bug reports, which are not always of high quality or readily available in practice [54]. Notably,
we differentiate our approach from IRFL as CosFL does not rely on bug reports and can understand semantic
information more accurately through LLMs.

7.2   Learning-based Fault Localization Techniques
With the advancement of artificial intelligence, the learning-based fault localization (LBFL) methods have emerged.
These methods embed code into vector space through feature engineering and representation learning, enabling
neural networks to identify incoming bugs by fitting them with situations during training.
   In general, most LBFL methods focus on utilizing coverage data more comprehensively and incorporate addi-
tional valuable information such as code history and bug reports. FLUCCS [46] enhances SBFL by integrating code
and change metrics. DeepFL [28] leverages Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [49] and Multi-Layer Perceptrons
(MLP) [38] to synthesize knowledge from four different dimensions: SBFL, mutation-based fault localization, code
complexity, and text similarity. GRACE [34] combines coverage data with detailed code structures using a Graph
Neural Network (GNN) [31] model. More LBFL techniques include CNNFL [64], TraPT [29], CombineFL [66], etc.
   However, due to the lack of scalability and interpretability, these approaches struggle to be applied in practical
scenarios [25]. In Section 6.2, we compared the performance differences between the CosFL and LBFL methods
under the cross-project scenario and the results demonstrate the superiority of our approach.

                                                                                            ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
28    •   Qin et al.


7.3       LLM-based Fault Localization Systems
Recently, the powerful code analysis capabilities of LLMs have offered new opportunities for FL, with preliminary
attempts such as AutoFL [23] and AgentFL [39] have guided LLMs to autonomously navigate through the code
base and identify defect locations.
   AutoFL [23] is an automated FL system that leverages the LLMs to not only pinpoint potential bug locations
but also to provide detailed explanations on the nature of the bug. AutoFL enables LLMs to effectively navigate
the source code by allowing them to execute specific functions that retrieve information about covered classes,
covered methods, and their corresponding implementations and documentation. With the provided functions,
the LLM systematically makes function calls to gather the necessary information and deduce the buggy location,
the natural language response output by LLMs is then used as the explanation.
   AgentFL [39] is an LLM-based FL system designed for project-level bug localization in large software codebases.
It utilizes multiple LLM-driven agents within a structured three-stage workflow: (1) Fault Comprehension.
This stage analyzes the fault’s potential causes by capturing comprehensive test execution behaviors through
lightweight program instrumentation. It provides richer fault insights compared to methods that rely solely
on error messages and failed test cases. (2) Codebase Navigation. This stage systematically narrows the search
space by identifying suspicious classes and methods. It combines existing and LLM-enhanced documentation to
link potential fault causes to specific code elements effectively. (3) Fault Confirmation. In this stage, the LLMs
iteratively review and score suspicious methods identified earlier, prioritizing them to determine the most likely
faulty method.
   In Section 5.1, we comprehensively compared CosFL with AutoFL and AgentFL. The results show that CosFL
significantly outperforms other LLM-based FL systems, which reveals the potential of boosting FL from the
perspective of semantic code search.




7.4       Semantic Code Representation for Fault Localization
Some existing works have also attempted to leverage semantic code representations for fault localization. For
example, FixLocator [30] is a Deep Learning (DL)-based fault localization approach that supports the detection of
faulty statements within one or multiple methods requiring modification in the same fix (i.e., co-change (CC)
fixing locations for a fault). HMCBL [11] proposed a directed, multiple-label code graph representation named
Semantic Flow Graph (SFG) to capture code semantics and subsequently introduced a hierarchical momentum
contrastive bug localization technique. However, we argue that these existing methods differ from our proposed
approach in two key aspects:
   Conceptual Differences. CosFL emphasizes the idea of using code search for fault localization. Code search
is a technique that utilizes a query (often expressed in natural language) to find semantically matching code
snippets within a code repository. Thus, a significant and challenging part of our work is the generation of
high-quality natural language queries. The other approaches based on code representation learning, while also
aiming to understand code, focus more on building models that learn to recognize buggy patterns directly from
code features, making them less directly aligned with the concept of utilizing code search for FL.
   Methodological Differences. The FL techniques based on representation learning typically involve designing
and training specialized neural network architectures directly on labeled datasets of code and bugs. Nonetheless,
the rapid evolution of LLMs has triggered a reshaping of the entire fault localization paradigm. Under this
background, we deeply integrate the capabilities of LLMs and embedding models in this work to explore potential
directions for the development of FL within this new technological landscape.


ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                    Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •        29


8   CONCLUSION
In this work, we present CosFL, a novel Fault Localization (FL) approach inspired by semantic Code Search (CS).
CosFL proposes to regard FL tasks as a two-step process: the query generation for generating a natural language
query to describe the problematic software functionalities, and the fault retrieval which employs CS to directly
match buggy program elements from the entire code repository. Evaluation results on 835 real bugs from 23 Java
projects show that CosFL can localize 324 bugs within Top-1 and 532 bugs within Top-5, which significantly
outperforms other state-of-the-art FL approaches. Through the ablation study and sensitivity analysis, we further
verify the contributions of various components within CosFL and its robustness under different parameter settings.
Finally, we dissect the internal workflow of CosFL and demonstrate its advantages in the FL task with two specific
case studies. Overall, this paper thoroughly explores the feasibility of boosting FL from the perspective of CS,
potentially paving new pathways for the advancement of FL techniques.

9   DATA AVAILABILITY
The code of CosFL is publicly available at https://github.com/IntHelloWorld/CosFL.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.62402506, No.62474196)
as well as the Research Foundation from NUDT (Grant No. ZK24-05).

REFERENCES
 [1] 2024. Sample size calculator. https://www.surveysystem.com/sscalc.htm
 [2] Rui Abreu, Peter Zoeteweij, and Arjan J.c. Van Gemund. 2006. An Evaluation of Similarity Coefficients for Software Fault Localization.
     In 2006 12th Pacific Rim International Symposium on Dependable Computing (PRDC’06). 39–46. https://doi.org/10.1109/PRDC.2006.18
 [3] Rui Abreu, Peter Zoeteweij, and Arjan JC Van Gemund. 2007. On the accuracy of spectrum-based fault localization. In Testing: Academic
     and Industrial Conference Practice and Research Techniques-MUTATION. IEEE, 89–98. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAIC.PART.2007.13
 [4] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt,
     Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2024. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL].
 [5] Toufique Ahmed and Premkumar Devanbu. 2023. Few-Shot Training LLMs for Project-Specific Code-Summarization. In Proceedings
     of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (Rochester, MI, USA) (ASE ’22). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 177, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3551349.3559555
 [6] Punam Bedi and Chhavi Sharma. 2016. Community detection in social networks. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 6, 3
     (2016), 115–135. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1178
 [7] Marcel Böhme, Ezekiel O Soremekun, Sudipta Chattopadhyay, Emamurho Ugherughe, and Andreas Zeller. 2017. Where is the bug and
     how is it fixed? an experiment with practitioners. In Proceedings of the 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering. ACM,
     117–128. https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106255
 [8] Zhikai Chen, Haitao Mao, Hang Li, Wei Jin, Hongzhi Wen, Xiaochi Wei, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, Wenqi Fan, Hui Liu, and Jiliang
     Tang. 2024. Exploring the Potential of Large Language Models (LLMs)in Learning on Graphs. SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. 25, 2 (March 2024),
     42–61. https://doi.org/10.1145/3655103.3655110
 [9] ChromaDB. 2024. ChromaDB. https://github.com/chroma-core/chroma.
[10] DeepSeek. 2024. DeepSeek-V2.5-1210. https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V2.5-1210.
[11] Yali Du and Zhongxing Yu. 2023. Pre-training Code Representation with Semantic Flow Graph for Effective Bug Localization. In
     Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
     (San Francisco, CA, USA) (ESEC/FSE 2023). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 579–591. https://doi.org/10.
     1145/3611643.3616338
[12] Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, and Jonathan Larson. 2024. From
     local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv:2404.16130 [cs.CL] (2024).
[13] Peter Emerson. 2013. The original Borda count and partial voting. Social Choice and Welfare 40, 2 (2013), 353–358. https://doi.org/10.
     1007/s00355-011-0603-9
[14] Xiaodong Gu, Hongyu Zhang, and Sunghun Kim. 2018. Deep code search. In 2018 IEEE/ACM 40th International Conference on Software
     Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 933–944. https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180167


                                                                                                        ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
30   •   Qin et al.


[15] Martin Hitz and Behzad Montazeri. 1995. Measuring coupling and cohesion in object-oriented systems. In Proc. International Symposium
     on Applied Corporate Computing, 1995.
[16] Francesca Incitti, Federico Urli, and Lauro Snidaro. 2023. Beyond word embeddings: A survey. Information Fusion 89 (2023), 418–436.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2022.08.024
[17] JavaAPI. 2024. instrument. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/instrument/package-summary.html.
[18] JGraphT. 2024. JGraphT. https://jgrapht.org.
[19] Yanjie Jiang, Hui Liu, Xiaoqing Luo, Zhihao Zhu, Xiaye Chi, Nan Niu, Yuxia Zhang, Yamin Hu, Pan Bian, and Lu Zhang. 2022.
     Bugbuilder: An automated approach to building bug repository. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49, 4 (2022), 1443–1463.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2022.3177713
[20] Haolin Jin, Linghan Huang, Haipeng Cai, Jun Yan, Bo Li, and Huaming Chen. 2024. From llms to llm-based agents for software
     engineering: A survey of current, challenges and future. arXiv:2408.02479 [cs.SE].
[21] JinaAI. 2024. Jina Embeddings. https://jina.ai/embeddings.
[22] René Just, Darioush Jalali, and Michael D Ernst. 2014. Defects4J: A database of existing faults to enable controlled testing studies
     for Java programs. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. ACM, 437–440. https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/2610384.2628055
[23] Sungmin Kang, Gabin An, and Shin Yoo. 2024. A Quantitative and Qualitative Evaluation of LLM-Based Explainable Fault Localization.
     Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1, FSE, Article 64 (July 2024), 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3660771
[24] Irvin R. Katz and John R. Anderson. 1987. Debugging: An Analysis of Bug-Location Strategies. Human–Computer Interaction 3, 4 (1987),
     351–399. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci0304_2
[25] Pavneet Singh Kochhar, Xin Xia, David Lo, and Shanping Li. 2016. Practitioners’ expectations on automated fault localization. In
     Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Saarbrücken, Germany) (ISSTA 2016). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 165–176. https://doi.org/10.1145/2931037.2931051
[26] Tim Korson and John D. McGregor. 1990. Understanding object-oriented: a unifying paradigm. Commun. ACM 33, 9 (Sept. 1990), 40–60.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/83880.84459
[27] A. Güneş Koru, Dongsong Zhang, Khaled El Emam, and Hongfang Liu. 2009. An Investigation into the Functional Form of the Size-Defect
     Relationship for Software Modules. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 35, 2 (2009), 293–304. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2008.90
[28] Xia Li, Wei Li, Yuqun Zhang, and Lingming Zhang. 2019. Deepfl: Integrating multiple fault diagnosis dimensions for deep fault
     localization. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 169–180. https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/3293882.3330574
[29] Xia Li and Lingming Zhang. 2017. Transforming Programs and Tests in Tandem for Fault Localization. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 1,
     OOPSLA, Article 92 (oct 2017), 30 pages.
[30] Yi Li, Shaohua Wang, and Tien N. Nguyen. 2022. Fault localization to detect co-change fixing locations. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
     Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Singapore, Singapore)
     (ESEC/FSE 2022). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 659–671. https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3549137
[31] Yujia Li, Richard Zemel, Marc Brockschmidt, and Daniel Tarlow. 2016. Gated Graph Sequence Neural Networks. In Proceedings of
     ICLR’16 (proceedings of iclr’16 ed.).
[32] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the
     Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 12 (02 2024), 157–173.
     https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00638
[33] LlamaIndex. 2024. LlamaIndex. https://github.com/run-llama/llama_index.
[34] Yiling Lou, Qihao Zhu, Jinhao Dong, Xia Li, Zeyu Sun, Dan Hao, Lu Zhang, and Lingming Zhang. 2021. Boosting Coverage-Based Fault
     Localization via Graph-Based Representation Learning. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering
     Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Athens, Greece) (ESEC/FSE 2021). Association for Computing
     Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 664–676. https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468580
[35] Daye Nam, Andrew Macvean, Vincent Hellendoorn, Bogdan Vasilescu, and Brad Myers. 2024. Using an LLM to Help With Code
     Understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering (Lisbon, Portugal) (ICSE ’24).
     Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 97, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639187
[36] OpenAI. 2024. OpenAI. https://openai.com.
[37] Mike Papadakis and Yves Le Traon. 2015. Metallaxis-FL: mutation-based fault localization. Software Testing, Verification and Reliability
     25, 5-7 (2015), 605–628.
[38] Marius-Constantin Popescu, Valentina E. Balas, Liliana Perescu-Popescu, and Nikos Mastorakis. 2009. Multilayer Perceptron and Neural
     Networks. WSEAS Trans. Cir. and Sys. 8, 7 (jul 2009), 579–588.
[39] Yihao Qin, Shangwen Wang, Yiling Lou, Jinhao Dong, Kaixin Wang, Xiaoling Li, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2024. AgentFL: Scaling LLM-based
     Fault Localization to Project-Level Context. arXiv:2403.16362 [cs.SE] (2024).



ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
                                                                     Fault Localization from the Semantic Code Search Perspective •        31


[40] Sofia Reis, Rui Abreu, and Marcelo D’Amorim. 2019. Demystifying the Combination of Dynamic Slicing and Spectrum-Based Fault
     Localization. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Macao, China) (IJCAI’19). AAAI Press,
     4760–4766.
[41] Chanchal K Roy, James R Cordy, and Rainer Koschke. 2009. Comparison and evaluation of code clone detection techniques and tools: A
     qualitative approach. Science of Computer Programming 74, 7 (2009), 470–495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2009.02.007
[42] Ripon K. Saha, Matthew Lease, Sarfraz Khurshid, and Dewayne E. Perry. 2013. Improving bug localization using structured information
     retrieval. In 2013 28th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). 345–355. https://doi.org/10.1109/
     ASE.2013.6693093
[43] Ensheng Shi, Yanlin Wang, Wenchao Gu, Lun Du, Hongyu Zhang, Shi Han, Dongmei Zhang, and Hongbin Sun. 2023. CoCoSoDa: Effective
     Contrastive Learning for Code Search. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 2198–2210.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00185
[44] Pinky Sitikhu, Kritish Pahi, Pujan Thapa, and Subarna Shakya. 2019. A Comparison of Semantic Similarity Methods for Maximum
     Human Interpretability. In 2019 Artificial Intelligence for Transforming Business and Society (AITB), Vol. 1. 1–4.
[45] Victor Sobreira, Thomas Durieux, Fernanda Madeiral, Martin Monperrus, and Marcelo de Almeida Maia. 2018. Dissection of a bug
     dataset: Anatomy of 395 patches from Defects4J. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and
     Reengineering. IEEE, 130–140. https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER.2018.8330203
[46] Jeongju Sohn and Shin Yoo. 2017. FLUCCS: Using Code and Change Metrics to Improve Fault Localization. In Proceedings of the
     26th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Santa Barbara, CA, USA) (ISSTA 2017). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 273–283. https://doi.org/10.1145/3092703.3092717
[47] Weisong Sun, Chunrong Fang, Yifei Ge, Yuling Hu, Yuchen Chen, Quanjun Zhang, Xiuting Ge, Yang Liu, and Zhenyu Chen. 2024. A
     Survey of Source Code Search: A 3-Dimensional Perspective. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 33, 6, Article 166 (June 2024), 51 pages.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3656341
[48] Tan Thongtan and Tanasanee Phienthrakul. 2019. Sentiment Classification Using Document Embeddings Trained with Cosine
     Similarity. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop,
     Fernando Alva-Manchego, Eunsol Choi, and Daniel Khashabi (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 407–414.
     https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-2057
[49] Mikolov Tomáŝ, Karafiát Martin, Burget Lukáŝ, Ĉernocký Jan, and Khudanpur Sanjeev. 2010. Recurrent neural network based language
     model. Interspeech 2010 (09 2010), 1045.
[50] Vincent A Traag, Ludo Waltman, and Nees Jan Van Eck. 2019. From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities.
     Scientific reports 9, 1 (2019), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-41695-z
[51] treesitter. 2024. tree-sitter. https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter.
[52] VoyageAI. 2024. VoyageAI. https://www.voyageai.com/.
[53] Yao Wan, Zhangqian Bi, Yang He, Jianguo Zhang, Hongyu Zhang, Yulei Sui, Guandong Xu, Hai Jin, and Philip Yu. 2024. Deep
     Learning for Code Intelligence: Survey, Benchmark and Toolkit. ACM Comput. Surv. 56, 12, Article 309 (Oct. 2024), 41 pages. https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/3664597
[54] Qianqian Wang, Chris Parnin, and Alessandro Orso. 2015. Evaluating the usefulness of IR-based fault localization techniques. In
     Proceedings of the 2015 International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Baltimore, MD, USA) (ISSTA 2015). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/2771783.2771797
[55] Shangwen Wang, Mingyang Geng, Bo Lin, Zhensu Sun, Ming Wen, Yepang Liu, Li Li, Tegawendé F Bissyandé, and Xiaoguang Mao.
     2024. Fusing Code Searchers. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2024).
[56] Shangwen Wang, Bo Lin, Zhensu Sun, Ming Wen, Yepang Liu, Yan Lei, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2023. Two Birds with One Stone: Boosting
     Code Generation and Code Search via a Generative Adversarial Network. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, OOPSLA2, Article 239 (oct 2023),
     30 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3622815
[57] W Eric Wong, Vidroha Debroy, Ruizhi Gao, and Yihao Li. 2013. The DStar method for effective software fault localization. IEEE
     Transactions on Reliability 63, 1 (2013), 290–308.
[58] W. Eric Wong, Ruizhi Gao, Yihao Li, Rui Abreu, and Franz Wotawa. 2016. A Survey on Software Fault Localization. IEEE Transactions on
     Software Engineering 42, 8 (2016), 707–740. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2016.2521368
[59] W. Eric Wong, Ruizhi Gao, Yihao Li, Rui Abreu, Franz Wotawa, and Dongcheng Li. 2023. Software Fault Localization: an Overview of
     Research, Techniques, and Tools. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chapter 1, 1–117. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119880929.ch1
[60] Wan-Ching Wu, Diane Kelly, and Kun Huang. 2012. User evaluation of query quality. In Proceedings of the 35th International ACM
     SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (Portland, Oregon, USA) (SIGIR ’12). Association for Computing
     Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 215–224. https://doi.org/10.1145/2348283.2348315
[61] Yonghao Wu, Zheng Li, Jie M. Zhang, Mike Papadakis, Mark Harman, and Yong Liu. 2023. Large Language Models in Fault Localisation.
     arXiv:2308.15276 [cs.SE].



                                                                                                         ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
32   •   Qin et al.


[62] Shicheng Xu, Liang Pang, Jun Xu, Huawei Shen, and Xueqi Cheng. 2024. List-aware Reranking-Truncation Joint Model for Search and
     Retrieval-augmented Generation. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 (Singapore, Singapore) (WWW ’24). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1330–1340. https://doi.org/10.1145/3589334.3645336
[63] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent:
     Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. arXiv:2405.15793 [cs.SE].
[64] Zhuo Zhang, Yan Lei, Xiaoguang Mao, and Panpan Li. 2019. CNN-FL: An effective approach for localizing faults using convolutional
     neural networks. In 2019 IEEE 26th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 445–455.
[65] Jian Zhou, Hongyu Zhang, and David Lo. 2012. Where should the bugs be fixed? More accurate information retrieval-based bug
     localization based on bug reports. In 2012 34th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 14–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/
     ICSE.2012.6227210
[66] Daming Zou, Jingjing Liang, Yingfei Xiong, Michael D. Ernst, and Lu Zhang. 2021. An Empirical Study of Fault Localization Families
     and Their Combinations. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 47, 2 (2021), 332–347. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2019.2892102

Received 25 December 2024; revised 3 June 2025; accepted 27 July 2025




ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
