                                                                                                           PDF Download
                                                                                                           3697013.pdf
                                                                                                           03 April 2026
                                                                                                           Total Citations: 9
                                                                                                           Total Downloads: 912
    .
    .
        Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3697013




                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                   Published: 23 February 2025
        .
                                                                                                   Online AM: 24 September
        .
    RESEARCH-ARTICLE                                                                               2024
    Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via                                              Accepted: 02 September 2024
                                                                                                   Revised: 27 August 2024
    Localization-and-Revision                                                                      Received: 24 January 2024




                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                   Citation in BibTeX format
    SHANGWEN WANG, National University of Defense Technology China,




                                                                                                   .
    Changsha, Hunan, China




                                                                                                   .
    .
    BO LIN, National University of Defense Technology China, Changsha,
    Hunan, China
    .
    LIQIAN CHEN, National University of Defense Technology China,
    Changsha, Hunan, China
    .
    XIAOGUANG MAO, National University of Defense Technology China,
    Changsha, Hunan, China
    .
    .
    .
    Open Access Support provided by:
    .
    National University of Defense Technology China
    .
                                     ACM Transactions on Soware Engineering and Methodology, Volume 34, Issue 3 (March 2025)
                                                                                               hps://doi.org/10.1145/3697013
                                                                                                             EISSN: 1557-7392
.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via
Localization-and-Revision
SHANGWEN WANG, BO LIN, LIQIAN CHEN, and XIAOGUANG MAO, National University
of Defense Technology, Changsha, China


Despite its effectiveness in ensuring software quality, code review remains a labor-intensive and time-
consuming task. In order to alleviate this burden on developers, researchers have proposed the automation of
code review activities, particularly focusing on automating code revisions. This automation can benefit both
code authors, as they are relieved from the manual task of code revision, and code reviewers, as they are spared
from addressing minor code flaws through manual comments. While current code revision approaches have
shown promising results, they typically operate within a single phase, in which the code requiring revision is
treated as the input of a deep learning model, and the revised code is directly generated through a sequence-to-
sequence transformation. Consequently, these approaches tackle both the challenges of localization (i.e., where
to revise) and revision (i.e., how to revise) simultaneously. Attempting to handle the entire complex process
with a single model goes against the principle of “Divide-and-Conquer,” which encourages breaking down
complex problems into smaller sub-problems and addressing them individually. In fact, we have observed that
existing code revision approaches often yield inaccurate results in both the localization and revision phases.
In this article, we present a two-phase code revision approach that aims to overcome the aforementioned
limitations by adhering to the “Divide-and-Conquer” principle. Our approach comprises two key components:
a localizer, responsible for identifying the specific parts of the input code that require revisions, and a reviser,
tasked with generating the revised code based on the localization result. Extensive experiments conducted on
two widely used datasets demonstrate the substantial superiority of our approach over existing code revision
approaches. For instance, when revising code based on the code reviewer’s comments, our approach achieves
a success rate of over 20% in implementing the ground-truth code revisions. In comparison, the widely used
pre-trained model CodeT5 achieves a success rate of less than 16% on the same test set, which contains 16K+
cases.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software maintenance tools; Maintaining software;
Automatic programming;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Code Review, Code Revision, Localization




This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022YFA1005101), the National Natural Science
Foundation of China No. 62402506, as well as the Research Foundation from NUDT (Grant No. ZK24-05).
Authors’ Contact Information: Shangwen Wang, Key Laboratory of Software Engineering for Complex Systems, College
of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China; e-mail: wangshangwen13@nudt.edu.cn; Bo
Lin (corresponding author), Key Laboratory of Software Engineering for Complex Systems, College of Computer, National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China; e-mail: linbo19@nudt.edu.cn; Liqian Chen, Key Laboratory of Software
Engineering for Complex Systems, College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China;
e-mail: lqchen@nudt.edu.cn; Xiaoguang Mao, Key Laboratory of Software Engineering for Complex Systems, College of
Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China; e-mail: xgmao@nudt.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 1557-7392/2025/2-ART58
https://doi.org/10.1145/3697013

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:2                                                                                                 S. Wang et al.

ACM Reference format:
Shangwen Wang, Bo Lin, Liqian Chen, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2025. Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code
Revisions via Localization-and-Revision. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 34, 3, Article 58 (February 2025),
26 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3697013



1   Introduction
Code review is a critical activity in modern software development [1, 35, 36], during which the
potential bugs are prevented and the software quality is thus ensured [2, 34]. Given the easily
recognized benefits, code reviews are widely adopted in both open source projects [44] and industrial
software [45]. However, these advantages often require significant human efforts, as code reviewers
have to manually inspect the code and code authors have to manually make revisions to address both
functional (e.g., compilation and testing) and non-functional (e.g., readability and maintainability)
concerns that have been identified. For instance, it was reported that Microsoft Bing requires more
than 3K reviews per month [43]. Quantitatively, developers spend an average of more than 6 hours
per week reviewing code submitted by others [3]. Moreover, reviewing forces developers to switch
context away from their current work, which may also increase the efforts spent in the code review
process [6].
   To reduce the burden on developers, researchers have proposed a number of approaches to
automate code review activities [49, 53, 54]. In this domain, there is a particular emphasis on
automating code revisions. This can involve proactively addressing potential flaws before submitting
the code (i.e., Code Revision before Review (CRB)) [49, 53] or making intended code changes in
response to comments from code reviewers (i.e., Code Revision after Review (CRA)) [27, 67],
both of which are considered as effective to boost the code review process. For instance, Tufano
et al. made the first step in this direction by using a supervised Transformer model [54], and they
later applied self-supervised pre-training techniques on such tasks [53]. We will refer to the existing
studies as code revision approaches hereafter.
   Despite some promising results achieved, existing code revision approaches do not follow a
common practice of making code changes. Specifically, the process of making a code change
typically consists of two primary steps: localization (addressing the question of where to change)
and revision (addressing the question of how to change). For instance, the widely studied Automatic
Program Repair (APR) techniques usually contain a fault localizer, which identifies the buggy
statements, and a patch generator, which performs program transformations to generate candidate
patches [13, 32]. In contrast, all the existing code revision approaches perform the task within a
single phase in which a deep learning model is utilized to change the submitted code, probably with
the review comment, into the code revised by the developer through a Sequence-to-Sequence
(seq2seq) transformation. In this paradigm, the model is required to perform both the localization
and revision tasks simultaneously, which means that it needs to first understand which parts of
the code require modifications and then autonomously make the necessary revisions to such code.
Having an individual model fulfill such a complex process contradicts a foundational principle in
software engineering, i.e., the “Divide-and-Conquer” principle, where it is encouraged to break down
a complex problem into smaller, more manageable sub-problems for facilitating problem-solving
[21]. Indeed, we have observed (and will illustrate with specific examples in Section 3) that models
operating within this paradigm could either pinpoint inaccurate locations for making modifications
or generate incorrect modifications, which can be considered as two primary limitations of existing
code revision approaches. Previous studies in the software engineering domain have shown that
splitting the original problem into several sub-problems and solving them independently would

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                      58:3

result in effectiveness enhancement [23, 29, 38]. We therefore postulate that the effectiveness of
code revision approaches could also be boosted if they could follow the “Divide-and-Conquer”
principle.
   Based on the above idea, in this article, we propose a two-phase approach named CodeReviser
for automating code revisions. CodeReviser consists of two main components, i.e., a localizer to
identify which parts of the code need to be revised, and a reviser to perform the modifications based
on the localization results of the localizer. The behind intuition is that by breaking down the code
revision task into two comparatively trivial sub-tasks, the localizer and reviser could effectively
accomplish their respective roles, thereby overcoming the aforementioned two limitations of
existing code revision approaches, and combining these two components would lead to more
qualified code revision results at the end. To provide qualified localization results, the localizer
of CodeReviser mainly faces two challenges, i.e., how to make use of the domain knowledge
encoded in the pre-trained code models and how to localize multiple code entities that need to
be changed. To tackle these challenges, the localizer in CodeReviser employs a novel generative
localization strategy, which offers a dual rationale. First, by formulating the localization task as a
seq2seq transformation, the localizer can leverage an encoder–decoder architecture and initialize
its parameters using pre-trained code models such as CodeT5 [62], which enables it to incorporate
domain knowledge about programming languages captured from vast amounts of data. Second,
by generating the localization result rather than selecting a fixed number of entities, the localizer
can theoretically provide a more flexible outcome, allowing for the localization of an arbitrary
number of code entities. Building on the impressive code generation capabilities demonstrated
by pre-trained code models [5, 57, 58, 62, 66], the reviser in CodeReviser leverages the existing
CodeT5 model and undergoes additional fine-tuning specific to its task. Consequently, from the
holistic view, both the localizer and the reviser components of CodeReviser adhere to the seq2seq
paradigm, where the former translates the input code into an intermediate representation that
includes the localization result, while the latter takes this intermediate representation as input and
generates the revision.
   To assess the effectiveness of CodeReviser, we perform extensive experiments on two widely
used datasets in the code revision domain, i.e., 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 [54] and 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 [53]. Re-
sults reveal that CodeReviser outperforms the state-of-the-art code revision approaches to a large
extent on both the CRB and the CRA tasks. For instance, in terms of the CRA task, CodeReviser
achieves Exact Match (EM) values (indicating how often an approach generates a code revision
that is identical to that made by developers) of 40.8% and 20.5% on the two datasets, respectively,
exceeding the best-performing baseline, i.e., CCT5 [28], by 17% and 22%. Moreover, a thorough
analysis reveals that CodeReviser exhibits more superior proficiency than state-of-the-art ap-
proaches in both precisely identifying modification locations and generating accurate revisions.
These findings suggest that adhering to the “Divide-and-Conquer” principle holds promise in
mitigating the limitations of current code revision approaches.
   In summary, our study makes the following major contributions:
   — Significance: Through case analysis, we identify the two primary challenges of current code
     revision approaches as: (1) pinpointing the accurate locations for making code revisions, and
     (2) generating the correct modifications.
   — Approach: We propose CodeReviser, a two-phase code revision approach that adheres to the
     “Divide-and-Conquer” principle. It employs a localizer to identify the specific parts of the
     code requiring revision, and a reviser to generate the necessary code changes. In particular,
     the localizer employs a novel generative localization strategy, which empowers the localizer to



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:4                                                                                                 S. Wang et al.




                             Fig. 1. A brief illustration of the code review process.


        leverage the capabilities of pre-trained code models while also enables it to identify multiple
        code segments in need of revision.
      — Experiments: We conduct extensive experiments in four different settings (two datasets × two
        code revision tasks), and find that our approach consistently outperforms existing approaches.
        We also open source the artifacts of this study at https://zenodo.org/record/8373320 to facilitate
        replications and follow-up studies.

2     Background
2.1     Code Review Process and the Involved Code Revision Tasks
Figure 1 illustrates the process of code reviews. Typically, there are three main activities in this
process. In the first step, code authors submit the code for review. Then, code reviewers check
the submitted code and judge its correctness. The result of this step would be either accepting the
code and merging it into the main repository or rejecting the code and explaining how to improve
the code with a detailed comment. Later, the code authors revise the code, address the received
comment, and re-submit the code for review again. Note that the re-submitted code may receive an
additional comment made by the reviewer, which could result in a second revision. Such a process
ends when the reviewer accepts the revised code.
   During this process, there are mainly two derived code revision tasks that can be automated to
enhance software development. We follow the existing studies to formulate these two tasks [49, 53,
54, 68].
   CRB. This type of revision could happen before the code authors submit their code (i.e., before
Step ①). The benefits of this type of revision are twofold: on the one hand, it could help the authors
address some simple flaws and thus improve the quality of the code before the code review; on the
other hand, it also releases the burden of the reviewers on commenting on simple flaws during
the review. Formally, given a code snippet to submit for review 𝐶𝑠 , and its revised version 𝐶𝑟 that
fulfills the recommended code changes from reviewers, this task is formulated as: 𝑓 (𝐶𝑠 ) → 𝐶𝑟 ,
where 𝑓 is a transformation approach, e.g., a deep learning model.
   CRA. This type of revision aims at revising the code based on reviewer’s comments (i.e., happens
between Step ②.b and Step ③). The benefits of this type of revision are also twofold: on the one
hand, the reviewer is able to attach to the comment a preview of how the code could look like by
addressing his/her concerns; on the other hand, the author is able to revise the code more quickly
since the initial revised version can be automatically generated. Formally, given 𝐶𝑠 and 𝐶𝑟 together
with a comment 𝑅𝑛𝑙 written by the reviewer in natural language, this task can be formulated as:
𝑓 (𝐶𝑠 , 𝑅𝑛𝑙 ) → 𝐶𝑟 , where 𝑓 is another transformation approach.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                      58:5

2.2   Existing Code Revision Approaches
In recent years, researchers have proposed a number of approaches based on the popular Trans-
former architecture [55] to automate code revisions. In the following, we briefly introduce the
existing approaches in the literature.
   Trans-Review [54] applies the Transformer architecture on the code revision tasks through a
seq2seq translation paradigm (i.e., translating code before review into code after review), and such
a paradigm is adopted by all the follow-up studies going to be introduced below. The main point
of this approach is that to reduce the vocabulary size, the literals and identifiers in the code are
abstracted, e.g., the method name hasProperties will be assigned the ID of METHOD_1.
   AutoTransform [49] utilizes a Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) tokenization [46] to overcome the
limitation of Trans-Review on generating new identifiers. Specifically, although Trans-Review could
be able to predict the correct ID for a new identifier or literal in the revised code (e.g., VAR_10),
it cannot map the ID back to the actual content (e.g., sidePanel). BPE splits a code token into a
sequence of frequently occurring sub-tokens, reducing the vocabulary size while preserving the
ability of generating new tokens.
   T5-Review [53] leverages the Text-To-Text Transfer Transformer (T5) architecture [40]. The model
is pre-trained on a dataset collected from Stack Overflow and the CodeSearchNet dataset [18], with
the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) pre-training task where the model is asked to predict
some randomly masked contents.
   CodeT5 [62] is another pre-trained model. Beyond the MLM task, it is also trained to tag identifiers
in the code and further predict the detailed identifier names. The recent reproduction study [68]
shows that CodeT5 outperforms the aforementioned approaches on code revision tasks.
   NatGen [5], an extension of CodeT5, introduces an additional pre-training task where the model
is trained to transform unnatural code into a developer’s original writing style. This pre-training
process aims to strengthen the model’s grasp of code semantics, enabling it to produce code that
closely resembles human-written code. The ultimate result could be that its proficiency in code
revision tasks is enhanced.
   CoditT5 [67] builds on top of CodeT5 and designs a new pre-training task to enable the model to
reason about edits. Specifically, before outputting the revised code, the model is trained to generate
an edit plan first, which entails the detailed operations that are going to be performed on the given
code. It is expected that the edit plan can guide more accurate and precise code revisions.
   CodeReviewer [27] also initializes the model parameters from CodeT5 and continuously pre-trains
the model on a dataset collected from code review processes (i.e., consisting of code diffs and review
comments). This model is expected to be more capable of understanding code changes since during
the pre-training, the input to the model is in the code diff format.
   CCT5 [28] also takes code diffs as inputs in the pre-training phase. The difference between
this model and CodeReviewer mainly lies in its pre-training on a dataset gathered from software
evolution processes (i.e., consisting of code commits and commit messages). Moreover, it also
acquires the knowledge about program structure during the pre-training by predicting the code
diff based on the dataflow change.
   Summary. From the above introduction, it is evident that although existing code revision ap-
proaches may vary in their chosen pre-training tasks, they generally operate within a seq2seq
paradigm in which the submitted code is translated into its revised version through an individual
deep learning model. This necessitates the model to not only identify errors in the code but also
autonomously generate revisions for those errors. As we will demonstrate in the next section,
attempting to have a single model perform such a complex process may lead to its ineffectiveness
in both steps, which could be considered as the limitations of current code revision approaches.


ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:6                                                                                                 S. Wang et al.




Listing 1: The oracle code revision and the revision generated by CodeT5 for the method
HueBridgeNupnpDiscovery.


3 Motivating Examples
In this section, we demonstrate two cases where CodeT5 [62], the state-of-the-art code revision
approach [68], fails to generate the desired revision. We fine-tune and test the CodeT5-base model
on the widely used 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset [53], and both demonstrated cases are from the test set
of this dataset.
   In the first case shown in Listing 1, the code reviewer leaves a comment “Call Super with
false as a parameter,” which indicates that false should be used as a parameter in the function
call. However, in the original code, the function call only passes two constants as arguments
(i.e., SUPPORTED_THING_TYPES and DISCOVERY_TIMEOUT). To perform this revision, the developer
inserts false as the third argument. In contrast, CodeT5 replaces the first argument with false,
which leads to an incorrect function call. This indicates that CodeT5 comprehends the requirement
from the code reviewer is to use false as a function argument, but it unfortunately locates a wrong
place to pass the false parameter. From the coding conventions of Java language,1 parameters
with the Boolean type (e.g., true and false) are typically placed at the end of the parameter list.
This example demonstrates that when the submitted code is transformed directly into the revised
code, the code revision model may struggle to identify the specific locations for modifications,
resulting in the generation of inaccurate revisions.
   In the second case shown in Listing 2, the code reviewer asks for a code change by commenting
“Use a constant for ‘://’,” indicating that the string “://” in the code snippet should be replaced by
a constant with a descriptive name, which could potentially enhance the readability of the code
compared with the original hard-coded value [7]. To implement the necessary modification, the
developer utilizes a constant PROTOCOL_SEPARATOR, which aptly represents the semantic informa-
tion of the string, to serve as a replacement. Indeed, the string “://” is usually used to separate a
URL. In detail, the URL generally follows the structure of “<protocol>://<hostname>:<port>/,”
in which the string “://” separates the protocol used to access the resource and the hostname that
identifies the server. However, CodeT5 uses another constant URL_PROTOCOL to replace the string,
which incorrectly represents its meaning. Specifically, the protocol of the URL typically refers
to HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, and so on, but it is unrelated to the replaced string. As a result, CodeT5
generates an inaccurate replacement. This example demonstrates that when the submitted code
is transformed directly into the revised code, the code revision model may struggle to generate
accurate modifications even if it identifies which parts of the code should be revised.

1 https://www.baeldung.com/java-best-practices-many-parameters-method



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                      58:7




 Listing 2: The oracle code revision and the revision generated by CodeT5 for the method setPublicURIs.




   These two cases demonstrate that performing the code revision tasks in a seq2seq transformation
paradigm mainly faces two limitations, i.e., (1) the inaccurate identification of the specific locations
for modifications and (2) the inability of accurately generating desired modifications at the ground-
truth locations (the locations where the developers make revisions). Drawing on such observations,
we hypothesize that the effectiveness of code revision approaches could be improved by either
enhancing the accuracy of localization results or enhancing their ability to generate accurate
modifications. Inspired by the previous studies [25, 26, 29, 38] which split a complex task into several
sub-tasks, effectively address each sub-task, and successfully achieve effectiveness enhancements for
the original complex task in the end, we also propose to adopt the “Divide-and-Conquer” principle
to address the aforementioned limitations. Specifically, we can design a two-phase approach in
which a localizer first identifies the localizations for modifications, followed by a reviser that makes
the specific revisions. The underlying assumption here is that, by doing so, both the localizer and
reviser handle relatively trivial tasks compared to the direct transformation of the input code into
the revised code, which allows them to effectively address their respective assignments. Ultimately,
by combining these two models, we can enhance the effectiveness of code revisions. Indeed,
experiment results show that our approach can generate oracle outputs (i.e., the developer-provided
code) in the two cases shown in Listings 1 and 2.

4   Methodology
The overall workflow of CodeReviser is shown in Figure 2. Following the “Divide-and-Conquer”
principle, CodeReviser consists of a localizer, which identifies which parts of the code need to be
changed, and a reviser, which revises the code based on the output of the localizer. We introduce
the details of the two components in the following.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:8                                                                                                 S. Wang et al.




                                      Fig. 2. The workflow of CodeReviser.



4.1    Localizer
Generative Localization. Given a code snippet, the target of the localizer is to identify the code
tokens that need to be changed. We propose to identify the token or token spans that need to be
changed since as observed in cases like Listings 1 and 2, code revisions typically pertain to specific
parts of a statement, such as an expression or an individual code token. Therefore, the traditional
statement-level localization in the APR domain [69] would provide too coarse-grained localization
results for code revision approaches. In the literature, there is an approach named BEEP [59] that
can take the buggy method as the input and predict which code token is incorrect. However, directly
applying this approach on our task is inappropriate due to two limitations. First, the BEEP model is
trained from scratch through a supervised learning manner. However, as demonstrated by recent
studies [39, 57, 66, 68], pre-trained code models have outperformed traditional supervised deep
learning models on a wide range of software engineering tasks, potentially due to the domain
knowledge of programming languages captured during the pre-training. As a result, the exclusion
of utilizing pre-trained code models leads to a missed opportunity to leverage the extensive domain
knowledge encoded within them. Second, the BEEP model (with the help of the pointer generator
network [56]) assigns a value to each input token, which indicates the probability of it being
associated with a bug, and always selects the one with the highest probability as the buggy token.
However, code revisions usually involve multiple code tokens. For instance, as revealed by the
existing study [48], over half of the patches in the Defects4J benchmark [20], which contains
hundreds of bug-fixing patches mined from projects on GitHub, involve modifications in more than
four statements. Consequently, it is hard for BEEP to provide an accurate localization result when
multiple code tokens need to be changed.
   To overcome the aforementioned limitations, the localizer of CodeReviser adopts a generative
localization strategy that follows the seq2seq paradigm and translates the input code token sequence
into another sequence, where the localization result is included. The rationale of such a design is
twofold. On one hand, by treating the localization task in a seq2seq paradigm, we can borrow the
weapon of pre-trained code models with encoder–decoder architectures such as CodeT5, equip
the localizer with commonsense knowledge upon initialization instead of random initialization,
and therefore overcome the first limitation. On the other hand, the localization result is generated
rather than selected, so that such a strategy can theoretically localize an arbitrary number of code
tokens as long as the model generates accurate results, which addresses the second limitation.
   Representation of the Input. Formally, suppose the token sequence of the submitted code is
𝑇 = 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, . . . , 𝑡𝑛 with the length of 𝑛, and the token sequence of the reviewer’s comment is
𝐶 = 𝑤 1, 𝑤 2, . . . , 𝑤 𝑥 with the length of 𝑥. For the CRB task, the input to the localizer 𝐼𝑙𝑜𝑐 is the code
token sequence: 𝐼𝑙𝑜𝑐 = 𝑇 , while for the CRA task, the input to the localizer is the concatenation
of 𝑇 and 𝐶: 𝐼𝑙𝑜𝑐 = 𝑤 1, 𝑤 2, . . . , 𝑤 𝑥 , [𝑆𝐸𝑃], 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, . . . , 𝑡𝑛 , where [𝑆𝐸𝑃] is a special token indicating the
separation between the code and the comment.
   Representation of the Output. We identify several (𝑚) code token spans that are modified by
developers through comparing the original code token sequence with the sequence of the oracle

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                                           58:9




                      Listing 3: The oracle localization results for the two motivating examples.


code, i.e., the code revised by the developer (by performing token-level code diffs with the help of
the difflib 2 library of Python). Such 𝑚 code token spans are denoted as 𝑇 𝑆 = {𝑡𝑠 1, 𝑡𝑠 2, . . . , 𝑡𝑠𝑚 } where
𝑡𝑠𝑖 = 𝑡𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 , . . . , 𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑑 is a consecutive token sequence from 𝑇 with the length of |𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑑 − 𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 1|,
1 ≤ 𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 ≤ 𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑑 ≤ 𝑛. It should be noted that a token span can represent various entities in the
original code, such as a changed code token, a modified expression, or even a sequence of consec-
utive statements. If 𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑑 , it means that compared with the original code, the oracle code
inserts some contents starting from the position 𝑡𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 . The identified token spans correspond to
the specific sections in the original code that require modifications. The objective of the localizer
is to identify these spans, thereby facilitating the subsequent task of the reviser. To that end, we
use two special tokens (i.e., [𝑆𝑇 𝐴𝑅𝑇 ] and [𝐸𝑁 𝐷]) to signify the beginning and ending positions
of each modified token span and train the localizer to accurately predict the positions of these
two special tokens in its output. As a result, the oracle output of the localizer is denoted as 𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑐 =
𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, . . . , [𝑆𝑇 𝐴𝑅𝑇 ], 𝑡 1𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 , . . . , 𝑡 1𝑒𝑛𝑑 , [𝐸𝑁 𝐷], . . . , [𝑆𝑇 𝐴𝑅𝑇 ], 𝑡𝑚𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 , . . . , 𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑑 , [𝐸𝑁 𝐷], . . . , 𝑡𝑛 . In Listing
3, we demonstrate the oracle localization results for the two motivating examples in Section 3.
The first case is a vivid insertion example whose 𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 equals to 𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑑 . In such a case, the localizer
identifies the insertion point and downstream reviser is expected to insert two tokens at that point,
i.e., “,” and false. The second case has one modified code token span in the original code that
represents an individual token (the string “://”). The oracle output of the localizer should start the
token span with a [𝑆𝑇 𝐴𝑅𝑇 ] token and end it with an [𝐸𝑁 𝐷] token (as highlighted in yellow).
     It is widely observed that the outputs of large code models can be unstable. There is thus a
concern that whether we can ensure the generated localization result is in the required form (i.e.,
inserting a number of [START] and [END] token pairs into the original code token sequence). To
answer this question, we have checked our experiment results and confirmed that the outputs of
the localizer are in the ideal form. One possible explanation would be that during fine-tuning, the
model has learned the domain knowledge about how to perform such a task.
     Loss Calculation. Formally, the loss during the training process can be described as
                                                           𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑐
                                                           Õ
                                               L (𝜃 ) =           −𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝜃 (𝑡 𝑗 |𝐼𝑙𝑜𝑐 , 𝑡 < 𝑗 ),                                          (1)
                                                            𝑗=1

where 𝐼𝑙𝑜𝑐 is the input of the model whose contents depend on the ongoing task, 𝜃 is the set of pa-
rameters of the localizer, 𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑐 denotes the number of tokens in the oracle output 𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑐 (mathematically,
𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑐 = 𝑛 + 2 ∗ 𝑚), and 𝑡 < 𝑗 is the token sequence generated so far.

2 https://docs.python.org/3/library/difflib.html



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:10                                                                                                   S. Wang et al.

4.2     Reviser
Given the output token sequence of the localizer, the target of the reviser is quite straightforward,
that is, to generate the revised code. Considering the superior generation capability of the pre-
trained code models [5, 28, 62], the reviser of CodeReviser also follows the encoder–decoder
architecture to seek for a promising effectiveness.
   During training, for the CRB task, the input to the reviser 𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑣 is the oracle localization result
𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑐 , while for the CRA task, the input 𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑣 is the concatenation of 𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑐 and 𝐶 (the behind intuition
is that the reviewer’s comment could also help guide the revision process). Formally, suppose the
                                                                    0  0         0         0
token sequence of the oracle code associated with 𝑇 is 𝑇𝑜𝑟𝑎 = 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, . . . , 𝑡𝑛0 where 𝑛 denotes the
length of the token sequence after revision, the loss during the training process can be described as
                                                    0
                                                  𝑛
                                                  Õ                  0         0
                                        L (𝛽) =         −𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃 𝛽 (𝑡 𝑗 |𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑣 , 𝑡 < 𝑗 ),                              (2)
                                                  𝑗=1
                                                                                                    0
where 𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑣 is the input of the reviser, 𝛽 is the set of parameters of the reviser, and 𝑡 < 𝑗 is the token
sequence generated so far.
   It should be noted that during testing, the input to the reviser is not the oracle localization result
𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑐 , but the output obtained from the localizer.

4.3     Implementation Details
Our approach is implemented with the popular deep learning development framework PyTorch.3
All the experiments are performed on a server with 4 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs. We adopt
the same architecture as the T5 model [40] for both the localizer and the reviser. Specifically, each
model is based on the encoder–decoder architecture with 12 Transformer encoder layers and 12
Transformer decoder layers. In each layer, there are 12 attention heads and the hidden size is set
to 768.
   Both the localizer and the reviser are initialized with the parameters released by CodeT5. This is
because the CodeT5 model captures some commonsense knowledge about programming languages
and natural languages, and has served as the starting point for a number of recent studies [5, 27,
28, 67]. After that, these two models are further fine-tuned on the code revision datasets. During
fine-tuning, the learning rate and batch size for the two models are set to 5e-5 and 32, following
the existing study [28].

5     Experimental Design
5.1     Research Questions (RQs)
We have conducted several experiments to evaluate our approach CodeReviser. Specifically, we
seek to answer the following RQs:
  RQ1. Effectiveness of CRB. What is the effectiveness of CodeReviser on the CRB task? To answer
this question, we compare the performance of CodeReviser with those of the state-of-the-art
approaches on the CRB task.
  RQ2. Effectiveness of CRA. What is the effectiveness of CodeReviser on the CRA task? To answer
this question, we compare the performance of CodeReviser with those of the state-of-the-art
approaches on the CRA task.
  RQ3. Localization Ability. To what extent can CodeReviser generate revisions at the correct
locations? To answer this question, we check the output of CodeReviser and investigate the

3 https://pytorch.org/



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                    58:11

                               Table 1. The Statistics of Our Evaluation Datasets

                               Dataset             Training       Validation Test
                          𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎          13,756           1,719   1,719
                          𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎            134,239         16,780   16,780


proportion of the cases where CodeReviser performs modifications at the ground-truth locations
(i.e., the locations where the developers make revisions).
   RQ4. Revision Ability. To what extent can CodeReviser generate accurate modifications at the
ground-truth locations? To answer this question, we investigate how often CodeReviser generates
correct revisions under the condition that it identifies the ground-truth locations.
   To answer RQ3 and RQ4, we conduct post-processing after obtaining the revision results by
analyzing (1) whether the approach revised the code at the correct locations and (2) how well the
approach revises the code if it knows the ground-truth location. It should be noted that the inputs
to the models in RQ3 and RQ4 are identical to those in the first two RQs (i.e., we do not provide the
ground-truth locations to any approach in RQ3 or RQ4).

5.2   Datasets
Following existing studies [67, 68], we include two widely used datasets for evaluating CodeReviser,
namely 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 [54] and 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 [53]. These two datasets contain the code change
information as well as the reviewers’ comments, and thus can be used for both the CRB task and
the CRA task. As a result, both datasets are utilized to address all the four RQs. When performing
the CRB task (e.g., RQ1 and the CRB perspectives in RQ3 and RQ4), only the original code is used
as the input to the model, while for the CRA task (e.g., RQ2 and the CRA perspectives in RQ3 and
RQ4), both the original code and reviewers’ comments are used as the input. Note that all the code
changes in the datasets are from the method-level granularity, which is the most widely studied
granularity in the code revision domain [51, 52]. The detailed statistics of the datasets are shown in
Table 1.
   𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 is collected from 6,388 projects in Gerrit and 2,566 projects from GitHub.
Tufano et al. manually create a set of heuristics to filter out noisy data. For instance, a comment
with only one word or requests to add some test code is removed. They also require that the
submitted code and the revised code should each have a maximum of 100 tokens, and the revised
code must not introduce new tokens that are not originally present in the submitted code, which
may simplify the task for the model.
   𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 is mainly mined from 4,901 Java open source projects from GitHub, which have
at least 50 pull requests, 10 contributors, and 10 stars. Tufano et al. also pre-process the collected
data by various means, e.g., by excluding the non-English comments, removing any emoji and
non-ASCII characters from the comments, and performing the de-duplication.

5.3   Baselines
We have introduced existing code revision approaches in Section 2.2. In this work, we choose
to use CodeT5, NatGen, CoditT5, CodeReviewer, and CCT5 as the baselines. According to a recent
study [68], CodeT5 outperforms other popular pre-trained code models like CodeBERT [11] and
GraphCodeBERT [16], as well as previous code revision approaches including Trans-Review,
AutoTransform, and T5-Review, making it the top performer in code revision tasks. The other four
selected baselines have all strengthened the capability of CodeT5 in different aspects. In particular,
NatGen is trained to transform unnatural code into the form originally written by developers,

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:12                                                                                                S. Wang et al.

potentially enabling it to better revise code; CoditT5 is trained to generate edit plans, allowing
it to reason about code edits, whereas CodeReviewer and CCT5 are trained using code change
data, making them more proficient in comprehending code modifications. As a result, the selected
baselines can represent the state of the art in the code revision domain well.

5.4     Metrics
To answer RQ1 and RQ2, we report the performance of each code revision approach by comparing
the revised code with the oracle code (i.e., the code revised by the developer) from three different
aspects:
      — EM, also known as perfect prediction, focuses on assessing whether the code revised by a
        model exactly matches the oracle. Specifically, if the token sequence of the model’s output is
        identical to that of the ground truth, then EM = 1, otherwise, EM = 0. This is a strict metric,
        as even a subtle difference from the oracle can result in the model’s output receiving a score
        of 0. This metric has been widely adopted in the evaluation of previous studies [49, 53, 54].
      — CodeBLEU [42] assesses the similarity between the generated code and the oracle code. The
        central concept behind this metric lies in recognizing that, unlike plain text, code snippets
        inherently contain structural and semantic information in addition to lexical contents. Con-
        sequently, it assesses the generated code against the oracle code from various perspectives,
        encompassing token similarity (denoted as TM, calculated using standard BLEU metrics),
        syntactic similarity (denoted as SM, determined through AST structure comparisons), and
        dataflow similarity (referred to as DM, evaluated based on dataflow analysis). The final evalu-
        ation score is a composite measure that integrates these similarities, offering a comprehensive
        assessment of the quality of the generated code (more details about this metric are referred to
        the original study [42]). This metric has been widely used to assess the quality of the generated
        code by previous studies [57, 66].
      — Edit Progress (EP) [68] measures the progress made by the generated code on changing the
        submitted code into the oracle code. The basic idea of this metric is that in certain cases, the
        generated code might have reduced the number of errors in the submitted code, even if it
        is not an EM to the ground truth. In such cases, the EM metric falls short in fully capturing
        the effectiveness of code revision approaches. Let 𝐶,  ˜ 𝐶,
                                                                 ¯ and 𝐶ˆ denote the initial submitted
        code, the ground-truth code, and the revised code generated by the model, respectively. Then,
        the value of this metric represents the percentage of the modifications that are successfully
        accomplished by generating 𝐶ˆ from 𝐶,    ˜ compared with the total modifications required to
                    ˜      ¯
        transform 𝐶 into 𝐶. Formally, this metric can be calculated as
                                                          |𝐷𝐶→
                                                            ˜ 𝐶¯ | − |𝐷𝐶→ ˆ 𝐶¯ |
                                     𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑡 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 =                             ,                                (3)
                                                              |𝐷𝐶→ ˜ 𝐶¯ |

        where |𝐷𝐴→𝐵 | denotes the token-level edit distance [24] between a token sequence 𝐴 and a
        token sequence 𝐵. In this article, we calculate and report the average EP value on all the cases
        from the test set. This value indicates to what extent a code revision approach can release
        developers’ burdens from manual revisions: the higher, the better. It should be noted that an
        EM would achieve a 100% EP score while a model’s output 𝐶ˆ could also achieve a negative EP
        value if it generates more errors.
   To answer RQ3, we propose a metric named Localization Accuracy (LA) to measure the
localization ability of different code revision approaches. The basic idea of this metric is to assess if
an approach can accurately identify which parts of the code should be revised. We recall that in
Section 4.1, we have introduced that we can identify 𝑚 code token spans (denoted as 𝑇 𝑆) from the

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                    58:13

token sequence of the submitted code that are modified by the developer. Such a result is obtained
by performing token-level code diffs between the submitted code and the oracle code. To calculate
                                                                             0
the value of this metric, we also identify code token spans (denoted as 𝑇 𝑆 ) from the submitted code
that are modified by the code revision approach (by comparing the original code token sequence
with the sequence of the generated code). An approach is deemed successful in identifying the
                                 0
code requiring revisions if 𝑇 𝑆 exactly matches 𝑇 𝑆. Take Listing 2 as an example. By performing
token-level code diffs between the submitted code and the oracle code, we note the 𝑇 𝑆 contains
only one token span, which involves a single code token “://.” Then, by performing token-level code
                                                                                  0
diffs between the submitted code and the generated code, we note the 𝑇 𝑆 also merely contains
such a single token. This implies that in such a case, the code revision approach performs revisions
at the same locations where developers make code revisions, accurately identifying which parts
of the code should be modified. Finally, the value of LA is the percentage of the submitted code
           0
whose 𝑇 𝑆 is identical to 𝑇 𝑆. Formally, suppose the total number of samples in the test set is 𝑁 , the
                                            0
number of the submitted code whose 𝑇 𝑆 is identical to 𝑇 𝑆 is 𝑛𝑢𝑚 1 , then LA can be calculated as
                                                                  0    𝑛𝑢𝑚 1
                            𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 = 𝑃 (𝑇 𝑆 = 𝑇 𝑆 ) =          .                      (4)
                                                                        𝑁
   To answer RQ4, we propose a metric named Revision Accuracy (RA) to measure the revision
ability of different code revision approaches. The basic idea of this metric is to check if an approach
can generate correct revisions if it already knows the ground-truth locations. Consequently, this
metric is essentially a conditional probability. Formally, suppose the number of the submitted code
           0
whose 𝑇 𝑆 is identical to 𝑇 𝑆 is 𝑛𝑢𝑚 1 , the number of perfect predictions (the generated code 𝐶ˆ and
the ground-truth code 𝐶¯ are the same) is 𝑛𝑢𝑚 2 , then RA can be calculated as
                                                                    0   𝑛𝑢𝑚 2
                          𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 = 𝑃 (𝐶ˆ = 𝐶¯ |𝑇 𝑆 = 𝑇 𝑆 ) =         .                    (5)
                                                                        𝑛𝑢𝑚 1
5.5   Experiment Details
To mitigate the performance variance brought by different machines [66], we fine-tune and test all
the baselines on our own server. To avoid potential implementation biases, in our experiments, we
use the replication packages of CodeT5,4 NatGen,5 CoditT5,6 CodeReviewer,7 and CCT5.8
  During fine-tuning, the learning rate and the batch size of the baselines are set according to their
original studies. The best-performing model checkpoint on the validation set is used for testing.
We feed each submitted code from the test set (and the reviewer’s comment for the CRA task) into
the approaches and obtain the generated code. Then we calculate the metrics by comparing the
generated code with the ground truth.

6 Experiment Results
6.1 RQ1: Effectiveness on the CRB Task
The results of different approaches on the CRB task are shown in Table 2. We observe that CodeRe-
viser consistently outperforms the baselines with respect to all the three metrics. Specifically, on the
𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset, CodeReviser achieves an EM of 19.3%, exceeding the best-performing
baseline (CCT5 with 13.5%) by around 43%. The EP of CodeReviser reaches 48.4%, indicating that
it is capable of addressing nearly half of the revisions needed to transform the submitted code into

4 https://github.com/salesforce/CodeT5
5 https://github.com/saikat107/NatGen
6 https://github.com/EngineeringSoftware/CoditT5
7 https://github.com/microsoft/CodeBERT/tree/master/CodeReviewer
8 https://github.com/Ringbo/CCT5



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:14                                                                                                S. Wang et al.

                        Table 2. The Effectiveness of Different Approaches on the CRB
                                                  Task (in %)

                          Dataset             Approach           EM       CodeBLEU           EP
                                             CodeT5               8.7        72.9           44.6
                                             NatGen              10.7        71.6           43.5
                                             CoditT5              8.9        73.0           45.8
                    𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎         CodeReviewer        12.4        73.0           46.0
                                             CCT5                13.5        72.6           45.0
                                             CodeReviser         19.3        73.4           48.4
                                             CodeT5               4.7        73.8            7.6
                                             NatGen               4.5        73.4            7.2
                                             CoditT5              5.5        72.8            9.2
                      𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎         CodeReviewer         5.6        72.4            9.3
                                             CCT5                 5.7        73.2            7.2
                                             CodeReviser          7.6        74.1           12.8
                   The bold numbers indicate the maximum values.



the oracle version. It is worth noting that the CodeBLEU values of different approaches exhibit
minimal variation, ranging from 71.6% to 73.4%. This similarity can be attributed to the fact that
code revisions sometimes involve minor modifications (e.g., renaming a variable), resulting in a high
degree of similarity between the original code and the revised code. This suggests that CodeBLEU
may not be a differentiating metric when evaluating code revisions. However, it is important to
highlight that the CodeBLEU value of CodeReviser remains higher than those of the baselines.
This indicates that the code generated by CodeReviser exhibits the closest resemblance to the
oracle code among all the approaches considered.
   We observe the similar trends on the 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset. Specifically, the EM value of CodeRe-
viser reaches 7.6%, which already exceeds that of the state-of-the-art CCT5 by 33% (7.6% vs. 5.7%).
While the EM value of CodeReviser may appear small, it indicates that CodeReviser generates
the oracle code for over 300 additional cases compared to CCT5 given the large size of this dataset.
Similarly, CodeReviser achieves an EP of 12.8%, which is the only one that surpasses 10% among all
the involved techniques. We conduct the Wilcoxon signed-rank tests [63] to analyze the statistical
significance of the difference between the effectiveness of CodeReviser and the baselines. We opt
for non-parametric tests since they do not make assumptions about the distribution of the data or
the equality of variance and thus provide a more flexible approach to analyzing experimental data
[14, 29, 60]. Specifically, we compared the achieved EP values of CodeReviser on each individual
test case against those achieved by the baselines (we exclude the CodeBLEU score in the analysis
since it may not be a differentiating metric when evaluating code revisions, as observed from the
experiment results). Such a comparison was conducted for the two datasets and the results show
that CodeReviser significantly outperforms the baselines in both datasets. Specifically, all the
p-values are less than 0.01 in the comparison results.
   It is also worth highlighting that code revision approaches tend to achieve relatively higher
performances on the 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset. As we have discussed in Section 5.2, this observation
can be attributed to certain pre-processing steps employed on this dataset, such as limiting the
number of tokens in the code. These pre-processing steps may reduce the complexity of code
revisions, thus making it easier for the approaches to achieve better results on this particular
dataset.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                    58:15

                       Table 3. The Effectiveness of Different Approaches on the CRA
                                                 Task (in %)

                          Dataset             Approach           EM       CodeBLEU           EP
                                             CodeT5              30.2        77.2           59.8
                                             NatGen              32.8        78.6           59.5
                                             CoditT5             34.0        77.6           60.6
                    𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎         CodeReviewer        32.9        78.5           61.2
                                             CCT5                34.9        79.0           61.8
                                             CodeReviser         40.8        80.0           64.4
                                             CodeT5              15.9        75.9           25.3
                                             NatGen              16.6        76.3           23.8
                                             CoditT5             16.4        76.3           23.5
                      𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎         CodeReviewer        16.6        76.0           26.3
                                             CCT5                16.8        76.1           25.7
                                             CodeReviser         20.5        76.4           31.3
                   The bold numbers indicate the maximum values.


6.2   RQ2: Effectiveness on the CRA Task
The results of different approaches on the CRA task are shown in Table 3. We observe a phe-
nomenon similar to that in Table 2, i.e., CodeReviser consistently outperforms the existing code
revision approaches. In terms of the EM metric, CodeReviser achieves impressive results on the
𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 and 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 datasets, with scores of 40.8% and 20.5%, respectively. These
scores surpass the best-performing baseline, i.e., CCT5, by 17% (40.8% vs. 34.9%) and 22% (20.5% vs.
16.8%). Regarding the CodeBLEU metric, CodeReviser continues to outperform the baselines, albeit
with subtle improvements. However, it is worth noting that CodeReviser demonstrates significant
advancements in terms of the EP metric for the CRA task. For instance, on the 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎
dataset, CodeReviser achieves an EP value of 31.3%, representing an increase of around 20% com-
pared to the state-of-the-art CodeReviewer (31.3% vs. 26.3%). Also, our statistical test results show
that the p-values comparing the EP values of CodeReviser and those achieved by the baselines are
all less than 0.01 in the two datasets.
   By comparing the results listed in Tables 2 and 3, we note that all the code revision approaches
achieve higher performances on the CRA task compared with the CRB task. This implies that
incorporating reviewer’s comments as guidance in code revision tasks can result in higher-quality
revision outcomes. Upon manual examination, we observe that reviewer’s comments often offer
clear instructions on how to carry out code revisions, without which the model might perform
common but incorrect code transformations. Listing 4 gives a concrete example. In this case, the
reviewer’s comment, “Return quickFilters,” likely suggests a code revision to standardize the coding
style across the entire project by unifying the way of invoking class fields. The comment provides
highly specific guidance on how to perform the revision, and when incorporated into the approach
input, CodeReviser successfully produces the desired code, indicating the effectiveness of this
guidance. However, without the comment, CodeReviser changes the return type of this method
from List to Collection. The intent behind this code change may be to utilize a more abstract interface
type as the return type, thereby reducing dependencies on specific implementation classes. This
modification offers the potential advantage that if there is a need to substitute the specific collection
implementation in the future, one would only have to adjust the code within the method, leaving
the code that calls it unaffected. As a result, altering the return type in this scenario could enhance

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:16                                                                                                S. Wang et al.




Listing 4: The oracle code revision and the revision generated by CodeReviser when the reviewer’s comment
is unavailable for the method getQuickFilters.


                                Table 4. The LA of Different Approaches (in %)

   Task     Dataset                CodeT5     NatGen      CoditT5     CodeReviewer        CCT5     CodeReviser
       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎             11.9       15.8        13.5           17.3             18.6        26.1
   CRB  𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎               7.7        7.3         9.4           9.9              9.8         12.3
       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎             40.3       38.7        41.8           40.5             42.5        47.1
   CRA  𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎              25.0       25.0        24.5           26.5             25.7        30.5
 The bold numbers indicate the maximum values.


the flexibility, extensibility, and maintainability of the code. It is worth noting that updating the
return type, known as Return Type Update, is a common practice in software maintenance [12],
which could be a reason for CodeReviser to learn to perform this type of revision.

6.3     RQ3: LA
The LA of different approaches is shown in Table 4. We observe that the localization capabil-
ity of CodeReviser exceeds those of the baselines to a large margin. Specifically, when per-
forming the CRB task, the LA of CodeReviser reaches 26.1% and 12.3% on the 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎
and 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 datasets, respectively, outperforming the best performances from existing ap-
proaches by around 40% (26.1% vs. 18.6%) and 25% (12.3% vs. 9.9%). In terms of the CRA task, the
LA of CodeReviser increases to 47.1% and 30.5% on the two datasets, respectively, exceeding the
best-performing baselines by around 11% (47.1% vs. 42.5%) and 15% (30.5% vs. 26.5%). The obtained
results provide evidence that our approach excels in identifying the code segments that require
revisions, which may be attributed to the utilization of a specialized localizer specifically designed
for this task. By customizing the localizer to focus on the accurate localization, our approach
demonstrates enhanced performances in identifying the areas of code that necessitate revisions.

6.4     RQ4: RA
The RA of different approaches is listed in Table 5. We note that CodeReviser still consistently
outperforms the existing approaches in terms of the RA under different settings. For instance, when
performing the CRA task, the RA of CodeReviser reaches 86.7% and 67.2% on the 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎
and 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 datasets, respectively, while the best performances from the baselines are 84.7%
and 66.9%. Such results suggest that CodeReviser is more capable of generating correct revisions
at the ground-truth locations, compared with existing approaches. We also investigate the values
of CodeBLEU and EP of different approaches on the test samples whose ground-truth locations are

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                    58:17

                                Table 5. The RA of Different Approaches (in %)

   Task     Dataset                CodeT5     NatGen      CoditT5     CodeReviewer        CCT5     CodeReviser
       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎             71.8       67.8        66.1           71.6             72.6        74.2
   CRB  𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎              61.4       61.2        58.9           56.6             57.8        61.7
       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎             74.9       84.7        81.4           81.1             82.1        86.7
   CRA  𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎              63.6       66.3        66.9           62.6             65.3        67.2
 The bold numbers indicate the maximum values.

     Table 6. The CodeBLEU of Different Approaches when the Ground-Truth Locations Are Already
                                          Identified (in %)

   Task     Dataset                CodeT5     NatGen      CoditT5     CodeReviewer        CCT5     CodeReviser
       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎             90.3       89.7        88.1           90.9             90.5        91.6
   CRB  𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎              86.4       86.2        85.6           85.7             86.4        89.5
       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎             91.4       94.2        93.0           93.4             93.5        94.8
   CRA  𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎              90.2       90.0        91.0           90.0             90.6        91.2
 The bold numbers indicate the maximum values.

              Table 7. The EP of Different Approaches when the Ground-Truth Locations Are
                                         Already Identified (in %)

   Task     Dataset                CodeT5     NatGen      CoditT5     CodeReviewer        CCT5     CodeReviser
       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎             79.4       75.7        73.6           79.3             80.1        80.2
   CRB  𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎              70.3       70.3        68.7           66.0             65.9        70.4
       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎             83.9       89.2        87.4           86.9             86.2        90.7
   CRA  𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎              74.3       72.9        75.8           72.9             74.0        76.7
 The bold numbers indicate the maximum values.


already identified. Such results are listed in Tables 6 and 7. We observe the same phenomenon as that
from Table 5, i.e., compared with existing approaches, CodeReviser achieves better effectiveness in
terms of CodeBLEU and EP on the test samples whose ground-truth locations are already identified.
For instance, regarding the CRB task, the CodeBLEU value of CodeReviser reaches 91.6% and 89.5%
on the 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 and 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 datasets, respectively, while the best performances
from the baselines are 90.9% and 86.4%.
   By comparing the figures in Tables 4 and 5, we have made two key observations. First, the RA
of CodeReviser significantly surpasses its LA. This may indicate that the localizer of CodeRe-
viser may be the main performance bottleneck for the overall approach. To gain a quantitative
understanding of this observation, we conduct an experiment on the large-scale 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎
dataset in which we provide the reviser with the oracle localization results and evaluate its perfor-
mance. The results reveal that under these ideal conditions, the reviser achieves an EM value of
31.0%, surpassing the current value of 20.5% by over 50%. This finding indicates that improving
the effectiveness of the localizer is likely to have a significant impact on the overall performance
of the approach, and therefore, future efforts could be devoted into this direction. Second, the
improvement of CodeReviser over the baselines in terms of RA is not as significant as its improve-
ment in terms of LA. One possible explanation is that existing approaches have already acquired
substantial knowledge about code revisions during their pre-training processes, which may narrow
the performance gap between them and CodeReviser. For instance, NatGen is specifically trained
to transform unnatural code into its formal version, which likely enhances its capability for code

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:18                                                                                                S. Wang et al.

revision. Consequently, when applied to the CRB task, NatGen achieves an RA of 61.6% on the
𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset, which is only slightly lower than that of CodeReviser.


7     Discussion
7.1     Is Precise Localization a Prerequisite for Correct Revision?
Since CodeReviser comprises a localizer and a reviser, a relevant question arises: Is precise localiza-
tion a prerequisite for correct revision? To address this, we explore whether the reviser can produce
the correct code with inaccurate localization information. The answer, it turns out, is affirmative.
For instance, in the 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset, there are 295 cases where the localizer initially fails to
precisely identify the parts requiring revisions but the reviser ultimately produces an EM (w.r.t the
CRA task). Such results reveal the actual localization capability of the localizer might be slightly
lower than the figures shown in Table 4.
   A concrete example is shown in Listing 5. In this case, the reviewer asks for a code change by
commenting “Maybe call expectThrowable for consistency?,” indicating that within the body of the
revised method, it should invoke an overloaded method with the same name. To make this revision,
the developer simply needs to modify the name of the invoked method. As demonstrated in the
second part of the listing, the oracle localization result is only associated with such a single token.
On the contrary, CodeReviser’s localizer identifies the entire expression (highlighted in gray) as
contents that require revisions, resulting in an inaccurate localization outcome for the reviser.
Nevertheless, CodeReviser’s reviser still produces the correct ground-truth code. This example
highlights the reviser’s ability to overcome inaccurate localization results, demonstrating that it
can generate accurate revisions even when the localization is not precise.
   The example presented in this section aims to showcase that CodeReviser can generate accurate
revisions even with imprecise localization. In other words, the localization information given by
the localizer does not limit the location of code revision, and the reviser has a recovery capacity if
wrong localization information is given.


7.2     Comparison with Large Language Models (LLMs)
Recently, various LLMs have been proposed to facilitate developers’ development activities, such as
ChatGPT9 and GPT-4.10 A number of studies have showcased that LLMs can achieve competitive
results through prompting when compared with the state-of-the-art approaches in tasks like code
summarization [15], code generation [9], and test generation [8]. Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate
the performance of LLMs in the context of code revision tasks. To that end, we perform experiments
from two perspectives to understand how well the LLMs can achieve on the code revision task: We
first directly prompt a commercial LLM, after which we fine-tune an open source LLM to make it
be aware of the domain knowledge of code revision.

   7.2.1 Prompting of the Commercial LLM. Considering the costs of prompting a commercial LLM,
we perform an experiment on the test set of the large-scale 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset to quantitatively
understand the code revision effectiveness of ChatGPT. Specifically, we use the ChatGPT API
(accessed on 5 November 2023, and the temperature is set to 0) with the prompts to the model in
the form of:


9 https://chat.openai.com/
10 https://openai.com/product/gpt-4



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                    58:19




Listing 5: An example where the localizer of CodeReviser does not generate an accurate localization result
but the reviser finally produces the oracle revision.


 Assume that you are a Java programmer.
 Below is a code snippet that may contain some syntax or semantic errors:
 # <CODE>
 The comment from the code reviewer is:
 # <COMMENT>
 Please help me revise the code and output a new version.
 You can only show me the revised code.

   The first sentence is to prepare ChatGPT for the task related to Java language, followed by the
detailed task. The last sentence is to restrict ChatGPT to only output the code. Note that for the CRB
task, the review comment information is removed from the prompt. We calculate the metrics for
the revised code generated by ChatGPT. Results show that for the CRB task, the performances of
ChatGPT are 0.8% of EM, 59.6% of CodeBLEU, and 3.2% of EP; for the CRA task, the performances
of ChatGPT are 9.3% of EM, 70.2% of CodeBLEU, and 17.2% of EP. Compared with the results
listed in Tables 2 and 3, it is worth noting that ChatGPT, when utilized in the zero-shot manner,
does not outperform the state-of-the-art code revision approaches. For instance, on the CRA task,
CodeReviser can generate oracle code for more than 20% cases, while the percentage of ChatGPT
is less than 10%.
   7.2.2 Fine-Tuning of the Open Source LLM. A recent study has proposed an approach, LLaMA-
Reviewer [33], to fine-tune the LLMs on the code revision task, and in our study, we decide to
reproduce their approach on our test datasets. Specifically, the utilized LLM is LLaMA 11 and
the fine-tuning process adopts a parameter-efficient way, i.e., the LoRA approach that contains
less than 1% of trainable parameters compared with the original model. We fine-tune LLaMA
under the four settings (two datasets × two tasks) and the results are shown in Table 8. Results
show that our CodeReviser systematically outperforms LLaMA-Reviewer with respect to all the
metrics. Specifically, LLaMA-Reviewer achieves similar CodeBLEU values to CodeReviser, but
it is significantly outperformed by CodeReviser on the other two metrics, particularly on the
𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset (e.g., 31.3% vs. 9.8% in terms of the EP achieved on the CRA task).


11 https://llama.meta.com/



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:20                                                                                                S. Wang et al.

                Table 8. The Comparison between CodeReviser and LLaMA-Reviewer (in %)

                                                 LLaMA-Reviewer                   CodeReviser
               Task         Dataset          EM CodeBLEU EP                EM      CodeBLEU EP
                       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎       6.2     72.3    42.2         19.3       73.4    48.4
               CRB     𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎         1.7     70.7     3.9         7.6        74.1    12.8
                       𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎      22.0     78.6    54.1         40.8       80.0    64.4
               CRA     𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎         6.0     75.6     9.8         20.5       76.4    31.3



  Our investigations in this section reveal that both directly prompting or fine-tuning the LLMs
may not achieve the optimal results compared with the state-of-the-art approaches, underscoring
the need for further explorations into the utilization of LLMs for code revision tasks, which we
plan to pay attention to in our future work.

7.3     Automated Code Revision vs. Automated Program Repair
Another long-studied task in the software engineering domain, automated program repair [4, 10, 19,
30, 31, 64], also involves automatically changing the source code of a program (i.e., modifying the
buggy code into a correct version). This task, however, is mainly different from our study subject,
automated code revision, in the following two aspects. From the code specification perspective,
automated code revision approaches modify the code to implement the requirements described by
the review comments, which are in the natural language form, while automated program repair
approaches try to generate patches that can pass all the test cases, which are in the programming
language form. This means that automated program repair approaches can adopt a try-and-error
strategy to generate patches and finally output a test-adequate patch, while the patch generation
process of automated code revision approaches is one-shot since there is no clear indicator for
the correctness of the patches. From the approach input perspective, automated code revision
approaches usually take a function plus with review comments as the inputs, since they are unaware
of the specific buggy locations, while thanks to the test coverage analysis, automated program
repair approaches often take a buggy statement as the input, which is a finer-grained granularity.
Despite the differences, our “Divide-and-Conquer” approach design is inspired by the existing
automated program repair techniques, which usually have a fault localization step that identifies
the buggy statement from the entire code project and then modify the buggy statement to generate
patches.

7.4     Threats to Validity
External Threats. Recent years have witnessed a large number of pre-trained models being proposed
[39]. Our study may have a selection bias by considering several of them as baselines. However,
the involved pre-trained models are the most popular ones and have been shown to be the state-of-
the-art approaches on code revision tasks [68].
   Another threat is from the dataset perspective. In this study, we choose two widely used datasets
in the code review domain to evaluate the effectiveness of CodeReviser. These two datasets only
contain code review data from Java programming language. In our future work, we plan to extent
the evaluation to other languages, probably by re-using another dataset released by the previous
study [27].
   Internal Threats. The evaluation metrics may influence the experiment results as well as the
reached conclusions of the study. To mitigate the bias incurred by the metric selection, we use three
metrics in our evaluation that assess the quality of the generated code from different perspectives.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                    58:21

   CodeReviser builds on a pre-trained model (i.e., CodeT5) which is pre-trained on extensive
code-related data. There is thus a risk of data leakage. To investigate such a situation, we have
checked the evaluation datasets in our study and the pre-training dataset of CodeT5, and confirmed
that there is no overlapped data, meaning that our study does not face the threat from data leakage.
   Another threat comes from the dataset splitting. The two evaluation datasets (i.e., 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-
𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 and 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 ) are split into training, validation, test sets in an 8:1:1 ratio by
the original studies [53, 54]. Although such splittings are widely adopted by recent studies, the
effect of such a splitting to the overall performance is unknown. To better investigate this question,
we perform 10-fold cross-validation [22, 61] to evaluate the effectiveness of CodeReviser on the
CRB task. Results show that CodeReviser achieves rather similar performances in each round.
Specifically, the EM of CodeReviser ranges from 19.1% to 19.6% on the 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset,
while such a value ranges from 7.3% to 7.7% on the 𝑇 5-𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 dataset. Such results indicate that
the dataset splitting has a negligible impact on the overall performance. Therefore, in this article,
we report the performances of different approaches achieved on the common dataset splitting.

8     Related Work
8.1    Automating Other Code Review Activities
In this study, we focus on automating code revisions during the code review process. In the literature,
there are also a number of studies automating other code review activities. For instance, studies
have proposed to reduce the workload of developers on writing reviews [17, 47]. Specifically, CORE
[47] uses a multi-level embedding approach, which focuses on both word-level and character-level
information of code tokens, to embed code changes and reviews. After that, an attention neural
network is used to predict the relevance score between a code change and a review, and the review
with the highest score will be recommended. CommentFinder [17] is also a retrieval-based approach
which does not require any deep learning model. Given a changed method, it searches for the most
similar changed methods in a large-scale corpus through a two-step similarity measurement and
re-uses the associated reviews. Recent studies have also proposed to utilize pre-trained models to
generate reviews directly based on the submitted code [27, 53].
   Reviewer recommendation is also a hot topic in this domain since the previous study finds
that a non-negligible proportion of pull requests cannot be assigned to appropriate reviewers,
which negatively results in longer reviewing time [50]. CORRECT considers not only the relevant
cross-project work experience of a developer but also his/her experience in certain specialized
technologies when determining the potential reviewer [41]. The previous study [65] proposes to
construct a novel Comment Network by mining historical commenting interactions between code
authors and code reviewers, and predict highly relevant reviewers based on this social network.
The behind intuition is that developers who share common interests with the authors could be
appropriate reviewers.

8.2 Divide-and-Conquer in Software Engineering
As a foundational principle in software engineering, “Divide-and-Conquer” has been widely applied
in researches from this domain. According to whether the updated contents can be found from the
code change, Toper splits the just-in-time comment updating task into two sub-tasks (i.e., code-
indicative updates and non-code-indicative updates) and, respectively, utilizes a heuristic-based
approach and a deep learning-based model to effectively address the sub-tasks [29]. Traditional
translation-based code migration approaches often produce syntactically incorrect code [37].
To overcome this limitation, mppSMT splits the task into multiple phases where the syntactic
structure of the target code is generated first and the lexical tokens (e.g., APIs) are filled later [38].

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:22                                                                                                    S. Wang et al.

Similarly, SkCoder employs a retrieval-and-edit paradigm to accomplish the task of automatic
code generation (i.e., generating code snippets that fulfill the given natural language descriptions),
instead of generating the code from scratch [26]. Specifically, the process involves utilizing a
retriever to select a code snippet from a corpus as a preliminary sketch, followed by employing an
editor to modify the sketch and obtain the final target code. These studies motivate us to explore a
code revision approach that follows the “Divide-and-Conquer” principle.

9   Conclusion
This study introduces a two-phase code revision approach, designed to address the labor-intensive
nature of code review. By adhering to the “Divide-and-Conquer” principle, we separate the tasks of
localization and revision, which allows us to focus on each task individually and develop targeted
solutions for more effective code revision. Our approach, consisting of a localizer and a reviser,
outperforms existing approaches in extensive experiments. Specifically, when revising code based on
reviewer’s comments, our approach demonstrates a remarkable success rate of over 20% to generate
the oracle revision, surpassing the state-of-the-art approaches by a significant margin. These results
underscore the effectiveness of our approach in automating the code revision activities during
code review processes. Our analysis reveals that boosting the localization ability is a promising
direction for improving the effectiveness of code revision approaches. Technical strategies that can
be foreseen include utilizing more advanced code models and exploring the semantic relationships
between the review comments and the code.

Data Availability Statement
All code and data in this study are publicly available at https://zenodo.org/record/8373320

References
 [1] Alberto Bacchelli and Christian Bird. 2013. Expectations, outcomes, and challenges of modern code review. In 2013 35th
     International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 712–721. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2013.6606617
 [2] Gabriele Bavota and Barbara Russo. 2015. Four eyes are better than two: On the impact of code reviews on software
     quality. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 81–90. DOI:
     https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSM.2015.7332454
 [3] Amiangshu Bosu and Jeffrey C. Carver. 2013. Impact of peer code review on peer impression formation: A survey. In
     2013 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement. IEEE, 133–142. DOI:
     https://doi.org/10.1109/ESEM.2013.23
 [4] Islem Bouzenia, Premkumar Devanbu, and Michael Pradel. 2024. RepairAgent: An autonomous, LLM-based agent for
     program repair. arXiv:2403.17134.
 [5] Saikat Chakraborty, Toufique Ahmed, Yangruibo Ding, Premkumar Devanbu, and Baishakhi Ray. 2022. NatGen:
     Generative pre-training by “Naturalizing” source code. In the 30th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering
     Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM, New York, NY. DOI:
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3549162
 [6] Jacek Czerwonka, Michaela Greiler, and Jack Tilford. 2015. Code reviews do not find bugs. How the current code
     review best practice slows us down. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering,
     Vol. 2. IEEE, 27–28. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2015.131
 [7] Florian Deissenboeck and Markus Pizka. 2006. Concise and consistent naming. Software Quality Journal 14 (2006),
     261–282. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11219-006-9219-1
 [8] Yinlin Deng, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Haoran Peng, Chenyuan Yang, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Large language
     models are zero-shot fuzzers: Fuzzing deep-learning libraries via large language models. In the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT
     International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA ’23). ACM, New York, NY, 423–435. DOI: https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/3597926.3598067
 [9] Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2023. Self-collaboration code generation via ChatGPT. arXiv:2304.07590.
[10] Zhiyu Fan, Xiang Gao, Martin Mirchev, Abhik Roychoudhury, and Shin Hwei Tan. 2023. Automated repair of programs
     from large language models. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE,
     1469–1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00128

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                            58:23

[11] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin
     Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. CodeBERT: A pre-trained model for programming and natural languages. In Findings of
     the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP ’20, 1536–1547. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findings-
     emnlp.139
[12] Beat Fluri and Harald C. Gall. 2006. Classifying change types for qualifying change couplings. In 14th IEEE International
     Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC ’06). IEEE, 35–45. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPC.2006.16
[13] Luca Gazzola, Daniela Micucci, and Leonardo Mariani. 2019. Automatic software repair: A survey. IEEE Transactions
     on Software Engineering 45, 1 (2019), 34–67. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2017.2755013
[14] Mingyang Geng, Shangwen Wang, Dezun Dong, Haotian Wang, Shaomeng Cao, Kechi Zhang, and Zhi Jin. 2023.
     Interpretation-based code summarization. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International Conference on Program Comprehension
     (ICPC). IEEE, 113–124. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPC58990.2023.00026
[15] Mingyang Geng, Shangwen Wang, Dezun Dong, Haotian Wang, Ge Li, Zhi Jin, Xiaoguang Mao, and Xiangke
     Liao. 2024. Large language models are few-shot summarizers: Multi-intent comment generation via in-context
     learning. In 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). ACM, New York, NY. DOI:
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3608134
[16] Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie LIU, Long Zhou, Nan Duan, Alexey Svyatkovskiy,
     Shengyu Fu, Michele Tufano, Shao Kun Deng, Colin Clement, Dawn Drain, Neel Sundaresan, Jian Yin, Daxin Jiang,
     and Ming Zhou. 2021. GraphCodeBERT: Pre-training code representations with data flow. In International Conference
     on Learning Representations. DOI: https://openreview.net/forum?id=jLoC4ez43PZ
[17] Yang Hong, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Patanamon Thongtanunam, and Aldeida Aleti. 2022. CommentFinder: A
     simpler, faster, more accurate code review comments recommendation. In the 30th ACM Joint European Software
     Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, 507–519. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
     1145/3540250.3549119
[18] Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc Brockschmidt. 2019. CodeSearchNet
     challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code search. arXiv:1909.09436.
[19] Matthew Jin, Syed Shahriar, Michele Tufano, Xin Shi, Shuai Lu, Neel Sundaresan, and Alexey Svyatkovskiy. 2023.
     Inferfix: End-to-end program repair with LLMs. In the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and
     Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. ACM, New York, NY, 1646–1656. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/
     3611643.3613892
[20] René Just, Darioush Jalali, and Michael D. Ernst. 2014. Defects4J: A database of existing faults to enable controlled
     testing studies for Java programs. In the 23rd International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. ACM, 437–440.
     DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2610384.2628055
[21] Donald Ervin Knuth. 1997. The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 3. Pearson Education.
[22] Ron Kohavi. 1995. A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selection. In 14th
     International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Montreal, Canada, 1137–1145.
[23] Anil Koyuncu, Tegawendé F. Bissyandé, Dongsun Kim, Kui Liu, Jacques Klein, Martin Monperrus, and Yves Le Traon.
     2019. D & C: A divide-and-conquer approach to IR-based bug localization. arXiv:1902.02703.
[24] Vladimir I. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. In Soviet Physics
     Doklady, Vol. 10. Soviet Union, 707–710.
[25] Jia Li, Yongmin Li, Ge Li, Xing Hu, Xin Xia, and Zhi Jin. 2021. EditSum: A retrieve-and-edit framework for source
     code summarization. In 2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE,
     155–166. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE51524.2021.9678724
[26] Jia Li, Yongmin Li, Ge Li, Zhi Jin, Yiyang Hao, and Xing Hu. 2023. SkCoder: A sketch-based approach for automatic
     code generation. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2124–2135. DOI:
     https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00179
[27] Zhiyu Li, Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Nan Duan, Shailesh Jannu, Grant Jenks, Deep Majumder, Jared Green, Alexey
     Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, and Neel Sundaresan. 2022. Automating code review activities by large-scale pre-training.
     In the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
     Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’22), 1035–1047. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3540250.3549081
[28] Bo Lin, Shangwen Wang, Zhongxin Liu, Yepang Liu, Xin Xia, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2023. CCT5: A code-change-oriented
     pre-trained model. In the 31st ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
     Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616339
[29] Bo Lin, Shangwen Wang, Zhongxin Liu, Xin Xia, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2022. Predictive comment updating with
     heuristics and AST-path-based neural learning: A two-phase approach. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49,
     4 (2022), 1640–1660. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2022.3185458




ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:24                                                                                                      S. Wang et al.

[30] Bo Lin, Shangwen Wang, Ming Wen, Liqian Chen, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2024. One size does not fit all: Multi-granularity
     patch generation for better automated program repair. In the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software
     Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3650212.3680381
[31] Bo Lin, Shangwen Wang, Ming Wen, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2022. Context-aware code change embedding for better
     patch correctness assessment. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 31, 3 (2022), 1–29.
     DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3505247
[32] Kui Liu, Shangwen Wang, Anil Koyuncu, Kisub Kim, Tegawendé F. Bissyandé, Dongsun Kim, Peng Wu, Jacques Klein,
     Xiaoguang Mao, and Yves Le Traon. 2020. On the efficiency of test suite based program repair: A systematic assessment
     of 16 automated repair systems for Java programs. In the 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM,
     615–627. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380338
[33] Junyi Lu, Lei Yu, Xiaojia Li, Li Yang, and Chun Zuo. 2023. LLaMA-Reviewer: Advancing code review automation
     with large language models through parameter-efficient fine-tuning. In 2023 IEEE 34th International Symposium on
     Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 647–658. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSRE59848.2023.00026
[34] Laura MacLeod, Michaela Greiler, Margaret-Anne Storey, Christian Bird, and Jacek Czerwonka. 2017. Code reviewing
     in the trenches: Challenges and best practices. IEEE Software 35, 4 (2017), 34–42. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.
     2017.265100500
[35] Shane McIntosh, Yasutaka Kamei, Bram Adams, and Ahmed E. Hassan. 2014. The impact of code review coverage and
     code review participation on software quality: A case study of the Qt, VTK, and ITK projects. In the 11th Working
     Conference on Mining Software Repositories, 192–201. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2597073.2597076
[36] Rodrigo Morales, Shane McIntosh, and Foutse Khomh. 2015. Do code review practices impact design quality? A case
     study of the Qt, VTK, and ITK projects. In 2015 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution,
     and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 171–180. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER.2015.7081827
[37] Anh Tuan Nguyen, Tung Thanh Nguyen, and Tien N. Nguyen. 2013. Lexical statistical machine translation for
     language migration. In 2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering, 651–654. DOI: https://doi.org/
     10.1145/2491411.2494584
[38] Anh Tuan Nguyen, Tung Thanh Nguyen, and Tien N. Nguyen. 2015. Divide-and-conquer approach for multi-phase
     statistical migration for source code (t). In 2015 30th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
     Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 585–596. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE.2015.74
[39] Changan Niu, Chuanyi Li, Vincent Ng, Dongxiao Chen, Jidong Ge, and Bin Luo. 2023. An empirical comparison of
     pre-trained models of source code. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE),
     2136–2148. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00180
[40] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and
     Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine
     Learning Research 21 (2020), 1–67. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5555/3455716.3455856
[41] Mohammad Masudur Rahman, Chanchal K. Roy, Jesse Redl, and Jason A. Collins. 2016. Correct: Code reviewer
     recommendation at GitHub for Vendasta technologies. In the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
     Software Engineering, 792–797. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970283
[42] Shuo Ren, Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Duyu Tang, Neel Sundaresan, Ming Zhou, Ambrosio Blanco,
     and Shuai Ma. 2020. CodeBLEU: A method for automatic evaluation of code synthesis. arXiv:2009.10297.
[43] Peter C. Rigby and Christian Bird. 2013. Convergent contemporary software peer review practices. In 2013 9th Joint
     Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering, 202–212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2491411.2491444
[44] Peter C. Rigby, Daniel M. German, Laura Cowen, and Margaret-Anne Storey. 2014. Peer review on open-source software
     projects: Parameters, statistical models, and theory. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
     (TOSEM) 23, 4 (2014), 1–33. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2594458
[45] Caitlin Sadowski, Emma Söderberg, Luke Church, Michal Sipko, and Alberto Bacchelli. 2018. Modern code review: A
     case study at Google. In the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice,
     181–190. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3183519.3183525
[46] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units.
     In 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics
     (ACL), 1715–1725.
[47] Jing Kai Siow, Cuiyun Gao, Lingling Fan, Sen Chen, and Yang Liu. 2020. Core: Automating review recommendation for
     code changes. In 2020 IEEE 27th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER).
     IEEE, 284–295. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER48275.2020.9054794
[48] Victor Sobreira, Thomas Durieux, Fernanda Madeiral, Martin Monperrus, and Marcelo de Almeida Maia. 2018.
     Dissection of a bug dataset: Anatomy of 395 patches from Defects4J. In the 25th International Conference on Software
     Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering. IEEE, 130–140. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER.2018.8330203



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
Divide-and-Conquer: Automating Code Revisions via Localization-and-Revision                                        58:25

[49] Patanamon Thongtanunam, Chanathip Pornprasit, and Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn. 2022. Autotransform: Auto-
     mated code transformation to support modern code review process. In the 44th International Conference on Software
     Engineering, 237–248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510067
[50] Patanamon Thongtanunam, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Raula Gaikovina Kula, Norihiro Yoshida, Hajimu Iida, and
     Ken-ichi Matsumoto. 2015. Who should review my code? A file location-based code-reviewer recommendation
     approach for modern code review. In 2015 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and
     Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 141–150. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER.2015.7081824
[51] Michele Tufano, Jevgenija Pantiuchina, Cody Watson, Gabriele Bavota, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2019. On learning
     meaningful code changes via neural machine translation. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software
     Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 25–36. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00021
[52] Michele Tufano, Cody Watson, Gabriele Bavota, Massimiliano Di Penta, Martin White, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2019.
     An empirical study on learning bug-fixing patches in the wild via neural machine translation. ACM Transactions on
     Software Engineering and Methodology 28, 4 (2019), 19:1–19:29. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3340544
[53] Rosalia Tufano, Simone Masiero, Antonio Mastropaolo, Luca Pascarella, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Gabriele Bavota.
     2022. Using pre-trained models to boost code review automation. In the 44th International Conference on Software
     Engineering, 2291–2302. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510621
[54] Rosalia Tufano, Luca Pascarella, Michele Tufano, Denys Poshyvanyk, and Gabriele Bavota. 2021. Towards automating
     code review activities. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 163–174.
     DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00027
[55] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
     Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. 30 (2017). Retrieved from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
     paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
[56] Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly. 2015. Pointer networks. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, Vol. 28. Curran Associates, Inc. Retrieved from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
     2015/file/29921001f2f04bd3baee84a12e98098f-Paper.pdf
[57] Shangwen Wang, Mingyang Geng, Bo Lin, Zhensu Sun, Ming Wen, Yepang Liu, Li Li, Tegawendé F. Bissyandé,
     and Xiaoguang Mao. 2023. Natural language to code: How far are we? In the 31st ACM Joint Meeting on European
     Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM. DOI:
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3611643.3616323
[58] Shangwen Wang, Bo Lin, Zhensu Sun, Ming Wen, Yepang Liu, Yan Lei, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2023. Two birds with one
     stone: Boosting code generation and code search via a generative adversarial network. Proceedings of the ACM on
     Programming Languages 7, OOPSLA2 (2023), 486–515. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3622815
[59] Shangwen Wang, Kui Liu, Bo Lin, Li Li, Jacques Klein, Xiaoguang Mao, and Tegawendé F. Bissyandé. 2021. Beep:
     Fine-grained fix localization by learning to predict buggy code elements. arXiv:2111.07739.
[60] Shangwen Wang, Ming Wen, Bo Lin, Yepang Liu, Tegawendé F. Bissyandé, and Xiaoguang Mao. 2023. Pre-
     implementation method name prediction for object-oriented programming. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
     and Methodology 32, 6, Article 157 (Sep. 2023), 35 pages. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3597203
[61] Shangwen Wang, Ming Wen, Bo Lin, Hongjun Wu, Yihao Qin, Deqing Zou, Xiaoguang Mao, and Hai Jin. 2020.
     Automated patch correctness assessment: How far are we? In the 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
     Software Engineering. ACM, 968–980. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416590
[62] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq Joty, and Steven C. H. Hoi. 2021. CodeT5: Identifier-aware unified pre-trained
     encoder-decoder models for code understanding and generation. In 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
     Language Processing, 8696–8708. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.685
[63] F. Wilcoxon. 1945. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biometrics Bulletin 1, 6 (1945), 80–83.
[64] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Automated program repair in the era of large pre-trained
     language models. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1482–1494.
     DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00129
[65] Yue Yu, Huaimin Wang, Gang Yin, and Tao Wang. 2016. Reviewer recommendation for pull-requests in GitHub: What
     can we learn from code review and bug assignment? Information and Software Technology 74 (2016), 204–218. DOI:
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2016.01.004
[66] Zhengran Zeng, Hanzhuo Tan, Haotian Zhang, Jing Li, Yuqun Zhang, and Lingming Zhang. 2022. An extensive study
     on pre-trained models for program understanding and generation. In the 31st ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
     on Software Testing and Analysis. ACM. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3533767.3534390
[67] Jiyang Zhang, Sheena Panthaplackel, Pengyu Nie, Junyi Jessy Li, and Milos Gligoric. 2022. CoditT5: Pretraining for
     source code and natural language editing. In the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
     Engineering. ACM. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3551349.3556955



ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
58:26                                                                                                   S. Wang et al.

[68] Xin Zhou, Kisub Kim, Bowen Xu, DongGyun Han, Junda He, and David Lo. 2023. Generation-based code review
     automation: How far are we? In 2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC),
     215–226. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPC58990.2023.00036
[69] Daming Zou, Jingjing Liang, Yingfei Xiong, Michael D. Ernst, and Lu Zhang. 2019. An empirical study of fault
     localization families and their combinations. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2019). DOI: https://doi.org/
     10.1109/TSE.2019.2892102

Received 24 January 2024; revised 27 August 2024; accepted 2 September 2024




ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 34, No. 3, Article 58. Publication date: February 2025.
